NAME|TYPE|START_YEAR|END_YEAR|DESCRIPTION

Liberty Head|Double Eagle|1849|1907|In the Old West (or anywhere else in the country for that matter), if you wanted to flaunt your wealth, you set down a stack of these on the counter or gaming table. In 19th century and early 20th century America, the Liberty Head double-eagle made people sit up and listen. This big gold coin had a long shelf life — 1849 through 1907. That covers the period from covered wagons and steamboats to the first automobiles and airplanes! True, the Liberty Head double-eagle doesn’t have the staggering beauty of our nation's only other circulating $20 gold coin, the Saint-Gaudens double-eagle, but it has a classic eye-appeal all its own.^^^^Like the $1 and $3 gold coin, the $20 gold piece was born out of the California Gold Rush of 1849. So much gold was coming out of the foothills of the Sierra Nevada, that the gold lobbyists gained tremendous power and influence – and they were able to push through legislation that allowed these new gold coin denominations. The new $20 gold coin was designed by James B!! Longacre (who not only designed the Liberty Head $1 gold coin, $3 Indian Princess Head gold coin, but the the Indian Head one-cent coin as well). The obverse design mirrored that of the Liberty Head $1 gold coin: a right-facing Liberty bust, her head of thick, tight curls adorned with a \"Liberty\" head band. The bust is surrounded by stars, with the date below the bust. The reverse design, however, was unique to the Liberty Head double-eagle: a majestically-posed eagle with U!!S!! shield on its chest, and flanked by two ornate banners reading \"E Pluribus Unum.\" Above the eagle is an elipse of stars and rays emanating out from the eagle wings.

Saint-Gaudens|Double Eagle|1907|1933|The $20 gold piece designed by Augustus Saint-Gaudens is considered by many to be the most beautiful United States coin. The first coins issued were slightly more than 12,000 high-relief pieces struck for general circulation. The relief is much higher than that of later issues and the date 1907 is in Roman numerals. A few of the Proof coins were made using the lettered-edge collar from the Ultra High Relief version. These can be distinguished by a pronounced bottom left serif on the N in UNUM, and other minor differences. Flat-relief double eagles were issued later in 1907 with Arabic numerals, and continued through 1933.^^^^The field of the rare, Ultra High Relief experimental pieces is extremely concave and connects directly with the edge without any border, giving it a sharp knifelike appearance. Liberty's skirt shows two folds on the side of her right leg; the Capitol building in the background at left is very small; the sun, on the reverse side, has 14 rays, as opposed to the regular high-relief coins, which have only 13 rays extending from the sun. High-relief Proofs are trial or experimental pieces.


Capped Bust To Right|Eagle|1795|1804|The Capped Bust Eagle was struck from 1795 until 1804, across two different subtypes and several varieties. At the time of issue, the eagle valued at $10, represented the the largest denomination within America’s coinage system. High quality examples are elusive, particularly for the first subtype. Many surviving specimens will display mounting remnants, repairs, or cleaning, making original and unimpaired coins highly desirable. Completion of a complete date set is an obtainable goal given the proper budget, however, for most collectors the goal might be to acquire a single coin to represent the type.^^^^The Mint Act of 1792 authorized the production of three different gold denominations. The half eagle with a value of five dollars was the first to be produced, followed by the eagle with a value of ten dollars. The quarter eagle, valued at $2!!50, would not be produced until 1796. The largest ten dollar denomination was intended for use in international trade, although pieces from other countries generally served this purpose. Use within domestic commerce was limited due to the high value of the coin. The few people of the late 18th century who had the opportunity to obtain a gold piece of such a high value would generally save it instead of spending it. Accordingly, mintages for the Capped Bust Eagles were relatively small, especially compared to the gold half eagles, which would become the coin of choice for smaller international transactions.^^^^The obverse of the Capped Bust Eagle features the bust of Liberty, facing right. The truncation is just below the upper part of the neck, which draped by a small part of clothing. Liberty wears a Phrygian cap with a lock of hair wrapping upwards, which gives the appearance of a turban. The word \"LIBERTY\" appears above, the date below, and stars to either side of the coin, coming in various counts and arrangements. The coins of 1795 and some of 1796 contain fifteen obverse stars. After Tennessee was admitted into the Union in mid-1796, a sixteenth star was added. In 1798 the number of stars was reduced to thirteen, which would remain the case until the end of the series. Some aspects of the obverse design lend to alternate names for the series, including Turban Head Eagle or Draped Bust Eagle.^^^^The initial reverse design for the series features an eagle of rather slim appearance, perched on a palm branch with wings spread. The branch usually has thirteen leaves, although one reverse die is known with only nine leaves. The eagle holds an olive branch wreath in its beak. The branch on which it sits usually has thirteen leaves, although one reverse die is known with just nine leaves. The words \"UNITED STATES OF AMERICA\" surround the image with the bottom area left blank. No denomination is included on either side of the coin, as these pieces were valued at their weight. This reverse was known as the \"small eagle\" type and used from 1795 to 1797.^^^^The second reverse, known as the \"heraldic eagle\" type, is based on the Great Seal of the United States. An eagle appears in a rather unnatural position with a shield against its breast. Thirteen small stars are between the eagle’s head and a cluster of clouds above. In the eagles claws are an olive branch and a bundle of arrows. Once again, \"UNITED STATES OF AMERICA\" is around, and no denomination is mentioned. This reverse design was introduced during 1797 and used until the end of the series in 1804. The obverse and both reverse designs were by Robert Scot.^^^^Production of the Capped Bust Eagle continued somewhat regularly until 1804 when Thomas Jefferson halted the production of gold eagles. At this time the Napoleonic Wars had driven the world price of gold higher and large quantities of U!!S!! gold coins were being melted. The denomination would not resume until 1838, after Congress adjusted the bimetallic ratio of gold and silver within U!!S!! coinage.

Liberty Head, No Motto Above Eagle|Eagle|1838|1866|Following a 34 year hiatus in production for the largest gold denomination, the Liberty Head Gold Eagle was introduced in 1838. The new ten dollar coins would feature a new design by Christian Gobrecht and a reduced weight and diameter. During the next two years, the design would be slightly modified and introduced on the two smaller gold denominations. Besides the addition of the motto on the reverse of the coin, the overall appearance would remain the same until the end of the series in 1907. For a span of nearly 70 years, the Philadelphia Mint and its branch Mints produced the Liberty Gold Eagles, creating many scarce issues and a number of true rarities.^^^^After the production of $10 gold pieces was suspended in 1804, the $5 half eagle served as the largest gold denomination and became the coin of choice for large, mostly overseas transactions. This would remain the case until the early 1830's when the price of gold had risen such that the melt value of the half eagles and quarter eagles exceeded their respective face values. Under the Coinage Act of 1834, the gold content for each denomination was reduced, which solved the issue for the half and quarter eagle, as well as cleared the way for the reintroduction of the $10 eagle denomination.^^^^The design for the Liberty Gold Eagle was created by Christian Gobrecht, the son of a German born immigrant and a talented engraver. He is also credited with the Liberty Seated design introduced on the silver denominations during the same era. For the gold coins, the head of Liberty appears, facing left. She wears a coronet inscribed LIBERTY with her hair bound in a knot with a beaded ribbon. The date appears below and thirteen stars surround. The obverse for coins of 1838 and some of 1839 feature a design known as \"Type of 1838\" differentiated by the pointed truncation of the neck, a partially covered ear, and the location of the tip of the coronet close to a star. The modified form of the design, or \"Type of 1840\", would be used until the end of the series.^^^^The reverse design depicts a bald eagle, grasping an olive branch in one talon and three arrows in the other. The eagle's wings are spread, and a large shield is placed at the chest. The inscription UNITED STATES OF AMERICA is around and the denomination expressed as TEN D. is near the bottom rim, representing the first time the face value was mentioned on the denomination. The reverse lettering was altered early in the series. For the earliest issues (1838 and 1839/8) the lettering was large, but it was reduced in size when the \"Type of 1840\" was introduced. In 1866, a scroll inscribed IN GOD WE TRUST was added above the head of the eagle. This motto had been added to the majority of denominations following the conclusion of the American Civil War. This second type for the Liberty Head Gold Eagle would be used until the conclusion of the series.^^^^In 1838 the weight and diameter of the eagle were reduced and the obverse and reverse were redesigned. Liberty now faced left and the word LIBERTY was placed on the coronet.

Liberty Head, Motto Above Eagle|Eagle|1866|1907|Following a 34 year hiatus in production for the largest gold denomination, the Liberty Head Gold Eagle was introduced in 1838. The new ten dollar coins would feature a new design by Christian Gobrecht and a reduced weight and diameter. During the next two years, the design would be slightly modified and introduced on the two smaller gold denominations. Besides the addition of the motto on the reverse of the coin, the overall appearance would remain the same until the end of the series in 1907. For a span of nearly 70 years, the Philadelphia Mint and its branch Mints produced the Liberty Gold Eagles, creating many scarce issues and a number of true rarities.^^^^After the production of $10 gold pieces was suspended in 1804, the $5 half eagle served as the largest gold denomination and became the coin of choice for large, mostly overseas transactions. This would remain the case until the early 1830's when the price of gold had risen such that the melt value of the half eagles and quarter eagles exceeded their respective face values. Under the Coinage Act of 1834, the gold content for each denomination was reduced, which solved the issue for the half and quarter eagle, as well as cleared the way for the reintroduction of the $10 eagle denomination.^^^^The design for the Liberty Gold Eagle was created by Christian Gobrecht, the son of a German born immigrant and a talented engraver. He is also credited with the Liberty Seated design introduced on the silver denominations during the same era. For the gold coins, the head of Liberty appears, facing left. She wears a coronet inscribed LIBERTY with her hair bound in a knot with a beaded ribbon. The date appears below and thirteen stars surround. The obverse for coins of 1838 and some of 1839 feature a design known as \"Type of 1838\" differentiated by the pointed truncation of the neck, a partially covered ear, and the location of the tip of the coronet close to a star. The modified form of the design, or \"Type of 1840\", would be used until the end of the series.^^^^The reverse design depicts a bald eagle, grasping an olive branch in one talon and three arrows in the other. The eagle's wings are spread, and a large shield is placed at the chest. The inscription UNITED STATES OF AMERICA is around and the denomination expressed as TEN D. is near the bottom rim, representing the first time the face value was mentioned on the denomination. The reverse lettering was altered early in the series. For the earliest issues (1838 and 1839/8) the lettering was large, but it was reduced in size when the \"Type of 1840\" was introduced. In 1866, a scroll inscribed IN GOD WE TRUST was added above the head of the eagle. This motto had been added to the majority of denominations following the conclusion of the American Civil War. This second type for the Liberty Head Gold Eagle would be used until the conclusion of the series.^^^^In 1838 the weight and diameter of the eagle were reduced and the obverse and reverse were redesigned. Liberty now faced left and the word LIBERTY was placed on the coronet.

Indian Head|Eagle|1907|1933|The Indian Head eagle was a ten-dollar gold piece, or eagle struck by the United States Mint continuously from 1907 until 1916, and then irregularly until 1933. The obverse and the reverse, designed by the sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens, were originally commissioned for use on other denominations. Saint-Gaudens was suffering from cancer, and did not survive to see the coins released.^^^^Beginning in 1904, President Theodore Roosevelt proposed the introduction of new, more artistic designs on US coins, prompting the Mint to hire Saint-Gaudens to create them. Roosevelt and Saint-Gaudens at first considered a uniform design for the four denominations of US coins, which were then struck in gold, but in 1907 Roosevelt decided to use a model for the obverse of the eagle that the sculptor had meant to use for the cent. For the reverse of the ten-dollar coin the President decided on a design featuring a standing bald eagle, which had been developed for the twenty-dollar piece designed by Saint-Gaudens.^^^^The coin, as sculpted by Saint-Gaudens, was in too high relief for the Mint to strike readily; completion of the design modifications necessary to make the coin sufficiently flat to be struck by one blow of the Mint's presses took months. Following the sculptor's death on August 3, 1907, Roosevelt insisted that the new eagle be finished and struck that month. New pieces were given to the President on August 31, which differ from the coins struck later for circulation.^^^^The omission of the motto \"In God We Trust\" on the new coins caused public outrage, and prompted Congress to pass a bill mandating its inclusion. Mint Chief Engraver Charles E!! Barber added the words and made minor modifications to the design. The Indian Head eagle was struck regularly until 1916, and then intermittently until President Franklin Roosevelt directed the Mint to stop producing gold coins in 1933. Its termination ended the series of eagles struck for circulation begun in 1795. Many Indian Head eagles were melted by the government in the late 1930s; the 1933 issue is a particular rarity, as few were distributed.


Capped Bust To Right|Half Eagle|1795|1807|The largest denomination struck in coin until the mid 19th century was the gold eagle, or $10 gold coin. Established by the Mint act of 1792, it was also called the coinage act of April 2, 1792. In Section nine of the Mint act, the denomination of the largest gold coinage was specified:^^^^This weight was specified at 16 grams of pure gold or 17!!5 grams of standard gold, which added a small percentage of other metals (mostly silver with some copper) to make the metal more durable in circulation. While authorized in 1792, it would take until 1795 before the first eagles were struck, after several denominations of copper and silver coins, and the first gold coins valued at five dollars (half eagles).^^^^The first eagles were designed by Chief Engraver Robert Scot. Personally appointed by President Thomas Jefferson, Scot had taken the position in November of 1793. Born in England, he appeared in the early 1780s in Philadelphia, where he apparently worked as a watchmaker. Within a few years, he was also engraving, as several Revolutionary notes are known from his hand. Although not dated, an engraving in the book \"Freemasonry in Pennsylvania 1727-1907\", published in 1908 showed an engraving of Mason’s Arms by Robert Scot. The book notes that \"this appears to have been his earliest work in this country\".^^^^The first eagles utilizing Robert Scots design were struck in September of 1795. The first of these, a total of 1,097 $10 gold pieces were delivered on the 22nd of that month, and it is believed that these were all of the BD (Bass-Dannreuther, Early U!!S!! gold coin varieties)-1 die pair. This variety appears to be the most common die pair of this type, although collecting and classifying these by variety is a study only undertaken by the most ambitious specialists. The estimated mintage of this variety is between 2,795 and 5,583 in that reference, as early mintages are vague and unreliable. The number of pieces known ranges between 250 and 350. Compared to the other varieties, this variety appears to be the most available, with the other three 1795, 13 leaves varieties ranging from R-4+ (90-110 known) to R-5 (35 to 60 known). The latter varieties are believed to have been struck until 1796 or even 1797, as the early dies were used until they were completely unusable, often after being severely lapped and put back into usage.^^^^There are two distinctive varieties known for the 1795 eagles, which are also listed in the Red book. Besides the previously mentioned 13 leaves variety, with thirteen leaves under the eagle, each representing one of the states in 1776, there is also a 9 leaves variety. The reason for its existence is unknown, but it appears to be made intentional, with the 11 leaves varieties known for both 1796 and 1797 eagles. In any case, the 9 leaves 1795 eagles (BD-3) are very rare with approximately twenty pieces known in all grades, making it the rarest variety for the type. Most of the remaining pieces are in lower grades, but a number of uncirculated examples are known as well. These are mostly impounded in specialized collections, and every opportunity to obtain one should be considered with great care.^^^^The 13 leaves variety is much more available, and in fact the most common coin for the type. This variety is occasionally available in high grades, exhibiting semi prooflike surfaces. The finest piece has been graded by NGC as MS-66, but has not been auctioned or appeared at the public market in that grade yet. A number of MS-63 and MS-64 pieces are included in private collections and auctions with irregularity, with the majority of uncirculated pieces in the MS-60 to 62 grades. Circulated coins are available on most auctions, often cleaned and damaged, offering great opportunities for collectors on a tight budget. With its popularity as type coins, however, one should not expect to find a bargain when buying a 1795 eagle in any grade. Conscious collectors should opt to include premium-quality pieces with high eye-appeal, showing the magnificent status this large, early United States gold coinage have held for the last two centuries

Capped Bust To Left|Half Eagle|1807|1812|The early years of the United States Mint were fraught with problems: The equipment was crude, serviceable die steel was difficult to obtain, and until 1816, men and horses, not steam, supplied power to operate the machinery. But one of the most serious problems facing the new enterprise was a lack of experienced personnel, particularly in the area of design and engraving.^^^^When the Mint began operations after the Coinage Act of 1792, employing suitable officers and workmen became one of the first priorities. As early as 1790, Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson (then the Cabinet officer in charge of the Mint) had been attempting to recruit qualified artisans from European cities where minting methods were state of the art. Jefferson had attended an exhibition at the Paris Mint in 1786, where he observed the operation of an improved coining press and was quite impressed with the machine and its inventor, French engraver Jean Pierre Droz. Droz’s methods were at the cutting edge of late 18th-century technology, and Jefferson was determined to retain his services for the proposed United States Mint. After some initial correspondence in 1786-87, the matter was tabled, as Droz apparently needed immediate employment and the Mint’s opening was still several years away. In 1790, negotiations with Droz were resumed and initially he accepted Jefferson’s offer, but later he declined, citing personal reasons.^^^^As the new Mint facility in Philadelphia began to take shape, a talented engraver was still to be found. Coiners Henry Voight and Adam Eckfeldt assisted in the preparation of the first dies, but it was not until August 1793 that the artist Joseph Wright was appointed as engraver. Unfortunately, Wright died a few weeks later from yellow fever, in the annual epidemic that struck Philadelphia in the summer months. He was succeeded by Robert Scot, an English watchmaker and banknote engraver of some repute. Scot’s talents as a die engraver, however, were marginal at best. Many of his early coinage designs received widespread criticism, putting him on the defensive from the very beginning. Apparently fearing competition, he thwarted every effort by Mint Director Henry DeSaussere to engage an assistant engraver. When John Smith Gardner was finally appointed to that position at the end of 1794, he lasted only 16 months, probably due to Scot’s jealousy and harassing tactics. For years, Scot’s authority and position would go unchallenged, and his designs continued to reflect his limited skills. Probably his best work is his 1795 design for the first half eagle, with its Draped Bust portrait of Liberty and its small eagle on the reverse. The small eagle gave way to the heraldic eagle in 1798, but by the turn of the century, Scot’s failing eyesight increasingly limited his usefulness as an engraver.^^^^During this era, thousands of immigrants began to arrive on the shores of the United States, including many refugees of the Napoleonic Wars. One of these emigres was John Reich, a German engraver who sold himself into indentured servitude in return for passage to America. By 1801, his skills were renowned in Philadelphia, even to President Thomas Jefferson, who recommended to Mint Director Elias Boudinot that Reich be employed. Boudinot complied, but apparently in deference to the excessively territorial Scot, Reich was not allowed to design coins but was assigned other miscellaneous tasks.^^^^Scot was 62 in 1807 when the new mint director, Robert Patterson, implored Jefferson for permission to formally hire Reich. By this time Reich was so disgusted with doing menial tasks at the Mint and enduring Scot’s jealousy that he was ready to return to Europe. Patterson was not about to lose Reich’s services, and offered him the permanent position of assistant engraver at a salary of only $600 per year—half of the $1200 Scot received. Patterson immediately assigned Reich to revamp all the coinage designs. He began with the half dollar and half eagle, the two \"workhorses\" of commerce in that era, preferred by banks for international payments and reserves.^^^^The Capped Bust motif Reich created for the 1807 half eagle features a buxom Miss Liberty facing left, flanked by seven stars to the left and six to the right. She is wearing a cloth cap inscribed LIBERTY, with curly hair falling out from the edge of her cap down to her shoulder. Reich’s Liberty has a distinctly European look, completely different from any previous depiction. When the coins entered circulation, newspapers of the day sardonically reported that Reich’s rendition was actually modeled after \"the artist’s fat mistress.\" Although the designer’s initials were not on the coin, almost all of Reich’s obverses have a characteristic notched point on the lowest star on the right—as his \"signature.\" On the half eagles, the notch faces the coin’s border. His reverse design depicts an eagle with outstretched wings, perched on a palm branch and holding three arrows in its claws. The motto E PLURIBUS UNUM appears on a ribbon above the eagle, and the inscriptions UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and 5D!! surround the central design. One of Reich’s innovations was to place the denomination on gold and silver coins. Except for the copper coins and the 1796-97 half dollars, earlier designs had no indication of value, commonly passing by weight and fineness.^^^^The Philadelphia Mint struck only 399,013 half eagles of this type between 1807 and 1812, and many were melted in later years, suffering the same fate as most U!!S!! gold minted before 1834. Possibly 1% of the mintage survived, mostly as curiosities, along with a few examples saved by early numismatic pioneers. Although there are some very scarce varieties such as 1808/7 and the 1810 small or large dates with small 5, these are usually only of interest to the dedicated specialist. Complete date sets are within the reach of many collectors, although the design is generally collected as a \"type.\"^^^^No dates in the series are very rare, and most specimens are found in grades from Extremely Fine to About Uncirculated!! Mint State pieces are regularly available, and some gems occasionally appear—usually the 1807, 1809/8, 1810 or 1812 issues, the latter two dates surfacing in old hoards. In the past, this series was a target of counterfeiters and many dangerous pieces still exist: Any questionable specimens should be authenticated. Wear first shows on Liberty’s hair and cap, and on the eagle’s wing tips, neck and claws.^^^^In 1813, Reich eliminated the bosom and drapery of Liberty and rearranged the stars, creating the Capped Head design. He quit in disgust in 1817, never receiving a raise or promotion in ten years. His design, however, would last much longer than his tenure at the Mint, appearing on the half eagle until 1834. In 1818, Scot remodeled Reich’s Capped Head half eagle, fashioning an almost identical, but cruder rendition of the original. Scot would remain in the position of Chief Engraver until his death in 1823. 

Capped Head To Left|Half Eagle|1813|1834|Ever since the 16th-century landings of Cortez in Mexico and the Pizarro Brothers in Peru, Central and South America have been continuously drained of precious metals. After the turn of the 19th-century, enormous new discoveries of silver on both continents fueled marked increases in mining and exportation and quickly lowered the worldwide price of silver in relation to gold. Unfortunately, the bi-metallic standard adopted in the United States under the Coinage Act of 1792 established a 15:1 ratio between the metals, and by 1813, the ratio in Europe was 16:1 or more. All circulating U!!S!! gold coins became worth more than their face value in silver, and speculators and bullion dealers quickly caught on. Fifteen ounces of silver would buy one ounce of gold in the U!!S!!, but that ounce of gold would bring sixteen ounces of silver in Paris or London, and the cycle could be continued ad infinitum, or at least until U!!S!! gold coins were no longer available. And that is precisely what happened.^^^^By 1813, the half eagle was the only U!!S!! gold coin being produced. Eagle coinage ceased in 1804 and quarter eagles hadn’t been minted since 1808. What little gold found its way to the Mint usually came from banks, and bankers generally preferred their bullion coined into half eagles. Although the \"fives\" were primarily used as reserves and for international payments, eventually the vast majority found their way into the melting pot.^^^^The Capped Head half eagle series, minted from 1813 to 1834, suffered the most destruction from these melts. Made during the period when widespread melting took place, much of the mintage never saw circulation and commonly went straight from the Mint into bullion dealers’ hands. Some forty-thousand pieces of \"recent mintage\" were destroyed in a single Paris melt in 1831. The small quantities that survived the melts before 1834 were decimated by the Mint’s later recoinage of the old-tenor pieces.^^^^Making its debut in 1813, John Reich’s Capped Head design for the half eagle was copied by Chief Engraver Robert Scot in 1818 and extensively reworked by William Kneass in 1829. Reich modified his earlier Capped Bust design by eliminating the bosom and drapery of Liberty, leaving a large head as the central device, surrounded by thirteen stars with the date below. The reverse, only slightly altered from his 1807 design, depicts an eagle with widespread wings, clutching an olive branch and arrows. Surrounding the eagle are the inscriptions UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and 5 D!!, with the motto E PLURIBUS UNUM above the eagle’s head. While Scot’s 1818 revision was a crude copy of Reich’s engraving, Kneass’ 1829 modification was a distinct change. Diameters were reduced from 25 to 22!!5 millimeters, the portrait appeared in higher relief, and a beaded border replaced the denticles of the previous coin.^^^^When discussing this series, the word \"rarity\" loses its meaning. Although the Philadelphia Mint produced 1,385,612 business strikes and approximately 150 proofs over a 22 year period, there are no common dates. The 1813 is most often encountered, with many of the several hundred survivors probably saved as first-year-of-issue souvenirs. Beginning a list of rarities unique in U!!S!! coinage is the 1814, with only a few dozen pieces known. The following year produced one of numismatics’ most celebrated coins, the low-mintage 1815, until this century considered the rarest date in the series. Only 12 pieces survive.^^^^The 1818 and 1820 issues are occasionally available, with the latter date appearing more frequently. Coins of 1819 and 1821 are much more elusive. The 5D/50 variety of 1819, with only seven examples known, is rarer than the 1815 issue but has never achieved equal fame. Next is the legendary 1822 half eagle, perhaps the greatest rarity of all U!!S!! coins and one of the most famous. Only three specimens exist today, with two permanently impounded in the Smithsonian Institution. When this coin appeared at public auction in 1982, it realized a then-astounding $687,500 in the famed \"Eliasberg Sale.\"^^^^It’s believed that 40-50 examples exist dated 1823, making it one of the more \"common\" dates of this type. For 1824, only 20 or so pieces are known. In 1825, there were two overdates struck: 1825/4 Uneven Date with perhaps 25-30 examples extant; and 1825/4 Even Date, another icon of rarity: only two pieces exist. Both 1825/4 Evev Date half eagles are in private collections, with the second example unknown until 1970, when it was found in a Michigan bank vault as part of the N!!M!! Kaufman collection. Following this legendary coin are a string of elusive to impossible issues including 1826, 1827, 1828 and 1828/7, with survivors ranging from fewer than six pieces (1828/7) to as many as two to three dozen (1826). The final year of the large diameter coins, 1829, is about equal to 1828/7 in rarity, trailing only the 1822 and 1825/4 pieces.^^^^In 1829, the transition was made to striking half eagles with a close collar, essentially a steel ring with vertical grooves inside. This innovation imparted a reeded edge to the finished coin and allowed smaller, standardized diameters. The new reduced size coins debuted with another landmark rarity, the 1829, an issue with perhaps 10 survivors in existence today. Two varieties followed in 1830 and 1831, with either large or small 5D, and approximately 75 examples are known of each date. A few dozen pieces exist for each year from 1832 through 1834, but only six specimens can be traced of the 1832 variety with twelve stars, making it rarer than the more ballyhooed 1815 and 1819 coins. Seeing little circulation, the majority of surviving coins are in grades ranging from XF to mint-state. Wear on this design first begins to show on Liberty’s cap and hair, and on the eagle’s wings and claws. Counterfeits are occasionally seen, including some crude 19th-century replicas of key dates.^^^^With so many great rarities in the series, Capped Head half eagles are generally regarded as a type coin and even then are usually pursued only by advanced collectors. With the exception of Louis Eliasberg’s holdings, almost all the great collections formed of this series were completed or at least started in the 19th century, most notably those of Stickney, Jenks, Steigerwalt, Dunham and Garrett.^^^^In the summer of 1834, Congress passed legislation lowering both the weight and fineness of U!!S!! gold coins. More than a generation had passed since half eagles were seen in commerce, and the new, lighter weight Classic Head coins were readily accepted and widely circulated. Continuing melts of the old tenor pieces made Capped Head half eagles the rarest series of Federal coinage, and today even a single example is often the highlight of many collections.

Classic Head|Half Eagle|1834|1838|For the first three decades of the 19th-century, the gold half eagle and silver half dollar were the workhorses of national commerce. Ironically, few saw daylight, spending their lives nestled in darkened vaults as bank reserves or disappearing across the Atlantic as international payments. Foreign silver pieces, underweight foreign gold coins and fractional banknotes served as retail currency in daily life. U!!S!! gold coins, whose bullion value on worldwide markets exceeded their face value in silver, experienced continual melting throughout the era. Suffering the worst destruction was the one gold coin minted during the years of heaviest melting, the Capped Head half eagle of 1813-1834. Congress finally addressed this untenable situation with the Mint Act of 1834. Drastic and long-lasting changes were now in store for the nation’s gold coinage. All gold coins were reduced in weight to a point where they would circulate—for the first time since 1795.^^^^U!!S!! Mint Director Samuel Moore was eager to get the new gold coins into circulation while withdrawing the pieces of 1795-1834 remaining in public hands. Expecting huge demand for the new issue (the Mint received old-tenor fives at a value of $5!!32), Moore ordered Engraver William Kneass to prepare an entirely new design. Kneass created a tousle-haired Liberty facing left, her thick and curly locks confined by a headband inscribed LIBERTY. The date was placed below and a circle of 13 stars surrounded the handsome, youthful head. The reverse continued the raised-wing eagle of the previous issue, surrounded by the inscriptions UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and 5 D!! Congress recommended identifying the new coins by placing the date AUGUST 1, 1834 on each, but Moore preferred omitting the scroll with E PLURIBUS UNUM used since 1807.^^^^This Classic Head design is distinctly boyish, but a more attractive concept than the similar head used on John Reich’s large cents of 1808-1814 and half cents of 1809-1836. All actually resemble youthful male athletes of ancient Greece rather than a female goddess of Liberty. Kneass’ concept never seemed to fully satisfy Mint officials, and some minor but continuous changes appeared throughout the series’ run. As Kneass faded into ill health and reduced activity, Christian Gobrecht tinkered further with the design in 1836. Variety collectors will find the Classic Heads a less busy field than the first issues of United States gold. Within the series’ five years there are more than a dozen distinct varieties, including changes to Liberty’s hair, and such variations as plain or crosslet 4s on the 1834 coins.^^^^Over 2!!1 million Classic Head half eagles were struck between 1834 and 1838, nearly all at the Philadelphia Mint. In 1838, new branch mints began operations at Charlotte, North Carolina and Dahlonega, Georgia. These coins have their distinctive mint marks on the obverse over the date. Charlotte (C) placed its mint mark on 17,179 coins. The entire output of Dahlonega (D) comprised only 20,583 pieces.^^^^ The Mint’s purpose was to return gold to daily circulation, and in this Director Moore enjoyed great success. The withdrawal of older coins was amazingly successful, with an estimated $8,000,000 in pre-1834 gold marching to the smelter for rebirth as Classic Head coinage. The new coins were of the same size and weight as the later Coronet Head coins designed by Christian Gobrecht, so they remained in circulation for many decades after their release.^^^^The severely limited mintages of Charlotte and Dahlonega have always attracted collectors, especially after publication of Augustus C!! Heaton’s 1893 treatise on collecting by mintmarks. Although Philadelphia half eagles were struck and circulated in adequate numbers, mint state examples of any date are highly elusive to very rare. Well-worn examples in the Fine to Very Fine range are generally available, though these often bear severe contact marks in addition to wear from circulation. Wear first appears on Liberty’s hair, particularly over her eye, and on her cheek. On the reverse, check the eagle’s wings and head.^^^^Few if any hoards of high grade have been found. Although the great Louis C!! Eliasberg collection contained 11 Classic Heads, only 1834 and 1835 were Uncirculated, and one of his 1834 Plain 4 coins was cataloged Proof-60. The remaining examples went from Choice About Uncirculated down to XF-45. Gem examples of Philadelphia issues do exist, but only 1834 Plain 4, and to a lesser extent, 1836, are seen with any frequency. The \"key\" date of the series is 1838-C, difficult to find in any grade and equal in rarity to many pre-1834 issues. Even more elusive is the scarcest variety of the series, the 1834 Crosslet 4—trailed closely by the 1838 Dahlonega coin, another \"stopper\" in mint state. A minuscule number of proofs exist of the Philadelphia dates, perhaps as many as 12 examples for 1834, three of 1835, two of 1836, and one each of 1837 and 1838 (the 1837 specimen is in the Smithsonian). Such coins are extremely rare and have appeared only in one or two of the great \"name\" auctions in recent years.^^^^The generally dismal grades so frequently encountered may prejudice collectors against this series, but all pre-Gold Rush coinage is usually found in similar condition. A collector taking the opportunity to view a high-grade example objectively, however, will discover that the Kneass design is really a bold example of America’s primitive neoclassical art. By 1838 this vintage design would yield to the wave of highly stereotyped motifs, such as Gobrecht’s Coronet, that improved the coins’ mechanical qualities but eliminated much of the life and vibrancy found in the earlier issues.^^^^The Classic Head coins circulated during times of significant economic disturbance. In the early 1830’s the country enjoyed a wild ride, including intense speculation in western lands and a fungus-like growth of totally unregulated and frequently shaky private banks. More destructive to the economy was the vast expansion of often unsecured paper money issued by the same banks. The Federal government’s major financial preoccupation was not a deficit but the huge surpluses piling up in each year of apparent prosperity. Trying to regulate runaway land speculation, President Andrew Jackson’s Specie Circular of July 1837 decreed that only gold or silver coins would be accepted for purchases of public lands.^^^^A business panic beginning in England in March of 1837 rapidly spread to the United States, and the last years of Classic Head coinage saw the disastrous depression known as the \"Hard Times.\" While hard money advocates such as Missouri Senator Thomas Hart Benton argued the pros and cons of Jacksonian monetary policies, hundreds of thousands of Americans starved in the winter of 1837-38. To them, a $5 gold piece would have represented breathtaking wealth in times that saw 90% of American factories idle. To these Americans, copper \"Hard Times\" tokens were far more familiar than gold coins of any denomination

Liberty Head|Half Eagle|1839|1908|In 1839 the coin was redesigned again. The new obverse was designed by Christian Gobrecht and is known as the \"Libery Head or Coronet head\". The reverse design remained largely the same, although the value was changed from \"5 D!!\" to \"Five D!!\". For those struck at the Philidephia Mint, there was no longer any silver in the coin, its composition was now !!900 gold and !!100 copper. However, gold ore used at the southern branch mints of Charlotte and Dahlonega had a high natural silver content, and many of these coins contained up to five percent silver. Its weight was virtually the same, 8!!359 grams, but the diameter was reduced one final time, to 21!!6 mm, in 1840, for a gold content of 0!!242 Troy Oz. This design was used for nearly 70 years, from 1839 to 1908, with a modest change in 1866, when \"In God We Trust\" was placed on the reverse above the eagle. It holds the distinction of being the only coin of a single design to be minted at seven U!!S!! Mints: Philadelphia, Dahlonega, Charlotte, New Orleans, San Francisco, Carson City, and Denver.

Indian Head|Half Eagle|1908|1929|This type conforms in design to the quarter eagle of the same date. The sunken-relief designs and lettering make the Indian Head a unique series, along with the quarter eagle, in United States coinage.


Stella|Four-Dollar Gold Piece|1879|1880|These pattern coins were first suggested by the Hon!! John A!! Kasson, then U!!S!! envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to Austria-Hungary. It was through the efforts of Dr!! W!!W!! Hubbell, who patented the alloy goloid (used in making another pattern piece, the goloid metric dollar) that we have these beautiful and interesting coins.^^^^The $4 Stella--so called because of the five-pointed star on the reverse--was envisioned by Kasson as America's answer to various foreign gold coins popular in the international market. The British sovereign, Italy's 20 lire, and the 20 pesetas of Spain were three such coins: each smaller than a U!!S!! $5 gold piece, they were used widely in international trade.^^^^The Stella was one of many proposals made to Congress for an international trade coin, and one of only several that made it to pattern coin form (others include the 1868 $5 and 1874 Bickford $10).^^^^Odds were stacked against the Stella from the start. The denomination of four U!!S!! dollars didn't match any of the coin's European counterparts, and at any rate the U!!S!! double eagle ($20 coin)--already used in international commerce--was a more convenient medium of exchange. The Stella was never minted in quantities for circulation.^^^^There are two distinct types in both years of issue. Charles E!! Barber designed the Flowing Hair type, and George T!! Morgan the Coiled Hair. They were struck  as patterns in gold, aluminum, copper, and white metal. Only those struck in gold are listed.


Three-Dollar Gold Piece|Three-Dollar Gold Piece|1854|1889|The three-dollar gold piece was authorized by the Act of February 21, 1853. Coinage was struck beginning in 1854. It was never popular and saw very little circulation.


Capped Bust To Right|Quarter Eagle|1796|1807|Capped Bust Quarter Eagles with stars on the obverse were the second in a long line of Quarter Eagles produced by the U!!S!! Mint. They were made from 1796 to 1807 with the highest mintage being 6,812 pieces in 1807. These rare gold coins were also designed by Chief Engraver Robert Scot.^^^^The obverse design is of Liberty facing right; she is wearing a soft cap with the inscription \"LIBERTY\" above, and the date below. The cap was long thought to be a Phrygian cap, taken from an ancient Roman model. However, even the Mint^^^^Director at the time Samuel Moore identified this cap in 1825 as a fashionable headdress of the 1790s. This series has many die changes. These coins have from 13 to 16 stars on the obverse. They also range in the number of stars from left to right on the obverse.^^^^The reverse of these gold coins shows a Heraldic Eagle with wings spread. A line of clouds stretch from wing to wing with 13 to 16 stars below. The designer Robert Scot superimposed a shield for the eagle’s breast and sketched the eagle holding arrows in one of its talons and an olive branch in the other.^^^^The inscription \"UNITED STATES OF AMERICA\" encircles the entire design.^^^^Another interesting fact with regard to these Quarter Eagles is that the dies used to make the coins were also used to produce early dimes of this design as well. 

Capped Bust To Left - Large Size|Quarter Eagle|1808|1808|In 1808 John Reich redesigned the quarter eagle. The diameter remained the same as earlier, but the obverse and reverse motifs were changed.^^^^Miss Liberty now faces left, wearing a loose cloth cap secured by a band inscribed LIBERTY. Seven stars are to the left and six are to the right, and the date 1808 appears below. No stars appear above her head.^^^^The reverse depicts an eagle perched on an olive branch and holding three arrows. The motto E PLURIBUS UNUM is on a band or ribbon above. The inscription UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and 21/2 D is around the border. The denomination is stated for the first time on a quarter eagle.^^^^The mintage figure of 2,710 on its own would suggest a rarity, but the demand for the coin as the only year of its design type has projected it into the forefront of popular rarities among American gold coins. It is believed that perhaps three or four dozen exist, nearly all of which are in the grades of Very Fine or Extremely Fine, although at least two Uncirculated coins can be accounted for.^^^^The 1808 quarter eagle is among classic rarities in American numismatics, and deservedly so. 

Capped Bust To Left|Quarter Eagle|1821|1834|Those dated 1829 to 1834 are smaller in diameter than the 1821 to 1827 pieces.

Classic Head - No Motto On Reverse|Quarter Eagle|1834|1839|In 1834, the quarter eagle was redesigned. A ribbon binding the hair, bearing the word LIBERTY, replaced the Liberty cap. The motto was omitted from the reverse.

Liberty Head|Quarter Eagle|1840|1907|Beginning in 1834, the Mint began a search for a suitable design that could serve as an enduring symbol on American gold coins. In that year Engraver William Kneass executed a head of Liberty for quarter eagles and half eagles that became known as the Classic design. But this design, although modified several times, was not to last, as it was adapted from John Reich’s old Classic Head motif first used on large cents in 1808 and officials continued to press for a symbol of Liberty more befitting the growing Republic. By 1838, Christian Gobrecht’s Coronet design for the eagle took center stage, and a version of this—in keeping with the Mint’s penchant for uniformity—was used on the quarter eagle starting in 1840.^^^^The design as finally adopted featured a large head of Liberty facing left, wearing a wide coronet inscribed with the word LIBERTY. Her hair is pulled back in a bun and held in place by a string of pearls. Thirteen stars are placed around the periphery, representing the original colonies, with the date below. The eagle on the reverse was essentially the same one that had been on quarter eagles since 1808. Originally designed by John Reich, the 1840-1907 version was modified by Gobrecht. The heraldic eagle has its wings spread from rim to rim with the union shield covering its breast. An olive branch representing the country’s peaceful intentions is in the eagle’s right claw, with three arrows emphasizing military preparedness in the left. The legend UNITED STATES OF AMERICA surrounds the eagle, with the denomination 2 1/2 D!! beneath the bird.^^^^ Between 1840 and 1907, a total of 11,921,171 Coronet quarter eagles were struck at five mints: Philadelphia (no mintmark), Charlotte (C), Dahlonega (D), New Orleans (O), and San Francisco (S). Mintmarks can be found on the lower reverse beneath the eagle. An estimated 4,232 proofs were also coined. The early (pre-1860) proofs are very rare, with only two or three pieces surviving from many years. Often, proofs have frosted white devices that contrast sharply against deeply mirrored fields. These \"cameo\" proofs are very popular as type pieces. Most of the proofs struck after 1901 have an all-brilliant finish with no field to device contrast. This brilliant finish continued until the end of the series in 1907, when Bela Pratt’s sunken relief Indian Head design debuted, and the matte proofing process was adopted.^^^^The series contains many individual rarities, some of legendary status, and a large number of scarce issues. Its exceptional length—remaining unchanged for 68 years, unlike the larger denominations that received the motto in 1866—makes it a very difficult series to complete. Although most collectors seek a single high grade example for type sets, others expand their horizons to include one coin from each mint, but even that is challenging. Charlotte and Dahlonega quarter eagles are particularly rare and expensive in mint condition, and these pieces are the keys to a collection from the five mints. San Francisco and New Orleans issues are also very scarce in AU and mint state, but generally undervalued compared to other mintmarked gold coins with similar mintages and survival rates. The most commonly found Coronet quarter eagles in mint state however, are the Philadelphia issues from 1851 through 1853, 1861, 1873, 1878 and after 1886. Philadelphia does have its rarities though: Civil War issues and the dates from 1874 through 1877, when specie payments were still suspended, are quite elusive. Some low mintage dates like the 1881 and 1885 exist today in larger numbers than their mintage would suggest: fortunately, many were recovered from European hoards.^^^^The series is replete with important coins, but none more famous and historically significant than the 1848 CAL!! quarter eagle. Made from some 230 ounces of native California ore shipped eastward in 1848, the resulting 1,389 quarter eagles are distinguished by the abbreviation CAL!! stamped into the die above the eagle’s head, and all authentic specimens have a square period after CAL!! Many collectors consider these CAL!! quarter eagles to be the first commemorative coins struck in the U!!S!!, predating the Columbian half dollar by 44 years.^^^^Also struck in the Philadelphia Mint are two other dates that have achieved fabled status, the 1841 and 1875. The 1841 has affectionately been labeled \"The Little Princess.\" Approximately fifteen examples are known and these extraordinarily rare coins have only been found in the finest and most comprehensive collections. The 1875 Philadelphia issue is another very rare date, with only 400 pieces struck and an estimated 23-25 examples surviving. Interestingly, one prominent gold collector in the Northeast has accumulated more than fifteen specimens of this key issue. Another famous rarity is the first year of issue from the San Francisco Mint, the 1854-S—one of the standout rarities in all of U!!S!! numismatics, with a scant 10 or so specimens believed to exist today in all grades. Only 246 quarter eagles were struck in that initial year, because the San Francisco Mint lacked parting acids (the same problem that plagued private minters at the time).^^^^When grading Coronet quarter eagles, friction begins to first show on the tip of the coronet and above the eye on the obverse, and on the wing tips and claws of the eagle on the reverse. Striking quality is usually quite good and should not present difficulties for most post-1878 issues, but earlier branch mint coins are especially prone to weakness on the hair curls around Liberty’s face and on the left leg of the eagle. Counterfeits are sometimes encountered, but the most frequently seen dates for bogus pieces are the common dates between 1900 and 1907. Altered mintmarks exist on certain key dates such as 1841 and 1875, but the diagnostics for the dies used to strike genuine coins are widely known: authentication is highly recommended.^^^^The unchanging durability of the Coronet design on quarter eagles is unrivaled in the history of U!!S!! coinage. This exceptionally long span of time still stands as the longest uninterrupted use of a coin design without a major design alteration, though the Roosevelt Dime may soon take this prize. When the first coins were struck in 1840, much of the United States was still a rough and tumble frontier that valued hard cider and log cabins enough to elect as their leader the coarse old Indian fighter, William Henry Harrison. As the final Coronet quarter eagles were struck in 1907, America was in many ways a different country than it had been in 1840. It retained the rugged individualism that had characterized the national spirit throughout the 19th century, but it was a more mature America, heralded not only for its powerful economic and military presence throughout the world, but for its diplomatic achievements as well—illustrated by Theodore Roosevelt’s winning of the 1906 Nobel Peace Prize for his role in negotiating an end to the Russo-Japanese War. 

CAL. Gold Quarter Eagle|Quarter Eagle|1848|1848|In 1848, about 230 ounces of gold were sent to Secretary of War William L!! Marcy by Colonel R!!B!! Mason, military governor of California. The gold was turned over to the Mint and made into quarter eagles. The distinguishing mark CAL!! was punched above the eagle on the reverse side, while the coins were in the die.

Indian Head|Quarter Eagle|1908|1929|The Indian Head Quarter Eagle is among the most affordable and collectible of all gold series. The series was introduced in 1908 and concluded in 1933. It is famous for having an incused design instead of raised as seen on the majority of coins. Although the series is now considered to be extremely artistic, there was some opposition when the coins first appeared in circulation, replacing the Liberty quarter eagles that were put into circulation in 1840, more then a generation earlier.^^^^Early in the 20th century President Roosevelt grew increasingly tired with the current coinage in circulation, in particular the gold coinage. All gold coins in circulation, from the quarter eagle to the eagle bore the same basic design, which had been introduced in the 1830's. The larger denominations, the eagles and double eagles had new designs introduced in 1907. Most people were in agreement that the new designs for these denominations represented major artistic improvements. The next year, the smaller denominations were set to change with the same goal.^^^^Dr. William Sturgis Bigelow, a close friend of President Roosevelt, had suggested using an incuse design for the minor gold coins. Up to that point, all United States coinage had a raised design and rim, although an intaglio design was opted back in 1792. After apparently receiving a positive response from Roosevelt, Bigelow contacted Boston sculptor Bela Lyon Pratt to design the new coins. Born in 1867, Pratt attended Yale University, and after graduation, traveled to France, in particular Paris, to study under well-known French sculptors. After his return in the early 1890s his future work would be widely influenced by this period.^^^^The designs for the Indian Quarter Eagle were finalized in late June of 1908, and production started during the last few months of the year at the Philadelphia Mint. The final design was similar to the newly introduced ten dollar design, but the incuse devices made it look much different. The obverse featured an Indian male chief with a large ceremonial headdress. The word LIBERTY is above, with thirteen stars surrounding and the date below. The reverse features an eagle, perched on a bundle of arrows with an olive branch in its claws. E PLURIBUS UNUM is in the left field, and IN GOD WE TRUST is in the right field. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA is on above, and the denomination, spelled as 2 1/2 DOLLARS is below.^^^^Indian Quarter Eagles circulated extensively, making most pieces available in the Extremely Fine to About Uncirculated grades. Mint State pieces are more difficult to locate, however can be found with some searching. The series contains a single key date makes completion of the set in any condition a challenging endeavor.^^^^Grading these pieces is considered to be the most difficult of all United States coinage, due to the incuse design which do not show much wear. Key features include the eyebrow and feathers on the obverse, and the eagles shoulder on the reverse. Even most Mint State coins will feature some friction on the cheek of the Indian, which is commonly accepted by the grading companies.


Liberty Head|Gold Dollar|1849|1854|Coinage of the gold dollar was authorized by the Act of March 3, 1849. The weight was 25!!8 grains, fineness !!900. The first type, struck until 1854, is known as the Liberty Head type.^^^^In 1854, the piece was made larger in diameter and thinner. The design was changed to a feather headdress on a female, generally referred to as the Indian Princess Head type. In 1856, the type was changed slightly by enlarging the size of the head.

Indian Princess Head, Small Head|Gold Dollar|1854|1856|Coinage of the gold dollar was authorized by the Act of March 3, 1849. The weight was 25!!8 grains, fineness !!900. The first type, struck until 1854, is known as the Liberty Head type.^^^^In 1854, the piece was made larger in diameter and thinner. The design was changed to a feather headdress on a female, generally referred to as the Indian Princess Head type. In 1856, the type was changed slightly by enlarging the size of the head.

Indian Princess Head, Large Head|Gold Dollar|1856|1889|Coinage of the gold dollar was authorized by the Act of March 3, 1849. The weight was 25!!8 grains, fineness !!900. The first type, struck until 1854, is known as the Liberty Head type.^^^^In 1854, the piece was made larger in diameter and thinner. The design was changed to a feather headdress on a female, generally referred to as the Indian Princess Head type. In 1856, the type was changed slightly by enlarging the size of the head.



Flowing Hair|Silver and Related Dollar|1794|1795|The Flowing Hair dollar was the first dollar coin issued by the United States federal government. The coin was minted in 1794 and 1795; its size and weight were based on the Spanish dollar, which was popular in trade throughout the Americas.^^^^In 1791, following a study by Alexander Hamilton, Congress passed a joint resolution calling for the establishment of a national mint. Later that year, in his third State of the Union address, President George Washington urged Congress to provide for a mint, which was officially authorized by the Coinage Act of 1792. Despite the authorization, silver and gold coins were not struck until 1794. The Flowing Hair dollar, designed by Robert Scot, was initially produced in 1794, and again in 1795. In October 1795 the design was replaced by the Draped Bust dollar.^^^^In May 2005, a specimen striking from the 1794 production was sold in a private sale for $7!!85 million, more than any other coin in history.

Draped Bust|Silver and Related Dollar|1795|1804|The Draped Bust dollar is a United States dollar coin minted from 1795 to 1803, and again into the 1850s. The design succeeded the Flowing Hair dollar, which began mintage in 1794 and was the first silver dollar struck by the United States Mint. The designer is unknown, though the distinction is usually credited to artist Gilbert Stuart. The model is also unknown, though Ann Willing Bingham has been suggested.^^^^In October 1795, newly appointed Mint Director Elias Boudinot ordered that the legal fineness of !!892 (89!!2%) silver be used for the dollar rather than the unauthorized fineness of !!900 (90%) silver that had been used since the denomination was first minted in 1794. Due largely to a decrease in the amount of silver deposited at the Philadelphia Mint, coinage of silver dollars declined throughout the latter years of the 18th century. In 1804, coinage of silver dollars was halted; the last date used during regular mint production was 1803.^^^^In 1834, silver dollar production was temporarily restarted to supply a diplomatic mission to Asia with a special set of proof coins. Officials mistakenly believed that dollars had last been minted with the date 1804, prompting them to use that date rather than the date in which the coins were actually struck. A limited number of 1804 dollars were struck by the Mint in later years, and they remain rare and valuable.

Gobrecht|Silver and Related Dollar|1836|1839|The Gobrecht dollar, minted from 1836 to 1839, was the first silver dollar struck for circulation by the United States Mint since production of that denomination was officially halted in 1806. The coin was struck in small numbers to determine whether the reintroduced silver dollar would be well received by the public.^^^^In 1835, Director of the United States Mint Samuel Moore resigned his post, and Robert M!! Patterson assumed the position. Shortly after, Patterson began an attempt to redesign the nation's coinage. After Mint Chief Engraver William Kneass suffered a stroke later that year, Christian Gobrecht was hired as an engraver. On August 1, Patterson wrote a letter to Philadelphia artist Thomas Sully laying out his plans for the dollar coin. He also asked Titian Peale to create a design for the coin. Sully created an obverse design depicting a seated representation of Liberty and Peale a reverse depicting a soaring bald eagle, which were converted into coin designs by Gobrecht. After the designs were created and trials struck, production of the working dies began in September 1836.^^^^After a small quantity was struck for circulation, the Mint received complaints regarding the prominent placement of Gobrecht's name on the dollar, and the design was modified to incorporate his name in a less conspicuous position. In January 1837, the legal standard for the percentage of precious metal in silver coins was changed from 89!!2% to 90%, and the Gobrecht dollars struck after that point reflect this change. In total, 1,900 Gobrecht dollars were struck during the official production run. Production of the Seated Liberty dollar, which utilized the same obverse design as the Gobrecht dollar, began mintage in 1840. In the 1850s, Mint officials controversially re-struck the coins without authorization.

Liberty Seated|Silver and Related Dollar|1840|1873|The Seated Liberty dollar was a one-dollar coin struck by the United States Mint from 1840 to 1873 and designed by its chief engraver, Christian Gobrecht. It was the last silver coin of that denomination to be struck before passage of the Coinage Act of 1873, which temporarily ended production of the silver dollar for American commerce. The coin's obverse is based on that of the Gobrecht dollar, which had been minted experimentally from 1836 to 1839. However, the soaring eagle used on the reverse of the Gobrecht dollar was not used; instead, the United States Mint (Mint) placed a heraldic eagle, based on a design by late Mint Chief Engraver John Reich first used on coins in 1807.^^^^Seated Liberty dollars were initially struck only at the Philadelphia Mint; in 1846, production began at the New Orleans facility. In the late 1840s, the price of silver increased relative to gold because of an increase in supply of the latter caused by the California gold rush; this led to the hoarding, export, and melting of American silver coins. The Coinage Act of 1853 decreased the weight of all silver coins of five cents or higher, except for the dollar, but also required a supplemental payment from those wishing their bullion struck into dollar coins. As little silver was being presented to the Mint at the time, production remained low. In the final years of the series, there was more silver produced in the US, and mintages increased.^^^^In 1866, \"In God We Trust\" was added to the dollar following its introduction to United States coinage earlier in the decade. Seated Liberty dollar production was halted by the Coinage Act of 1873, which authorized the Trade dollar for use in foreign commerce. Representatives of silver interests were unhappy when the metal's price dropped again in the mid-1870s; they advocated the resumption of the free coinage of silver into legal tender, and after the passage of the Bland-Allison Act in 1878, production resumed with the Morgan dollar.

Trade Dollars|Silver and Related Dollar|1873|1885|The United States trade dollar is a silver (fineness of !!900 or 90%) dollar coin that was issued by the United States Mint and minted in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Carson City, and San Francisco from 1873 to 1885. Trade dollars intended for circulation were last produced in 1878 and proof coin production continued until 1885. The coin weighs 420 grains (2!!2 g), about 8 grains (520 mg) more than the domestic silver dollar (Seated Liberty Dollars and Morgan Dollars) of the time. It is 4 grains heavier than the Mexican peso; however, the peso is !!903 silver.^^^^The coin was designed by William Barber, the mint's chief engraver. More trade dollars were minted in San Francisco than Carson City and Philadelphia combined. San Francisco was closest both to the source of the silver as well as the ultimate destination of the coins, China. Many Trade dollars have what are called \"chop marks\" on them. Chinese merchants would stamp the coins, thus guaranteeing weight and fineness and, also, advertising their businesses.^^^^The United States Congress authorized the U!!S!! Mint to create a trade dollar to improve trade with the Orient, China in particular. Prior to that, the Mexican peso had been the primary silver coin used in trading with China. In fact, the eagle on the trade dollar's reverse looks quite similar to the peso's.^^^^Collectors are warned that recently a large number of U!!S!! Trade dollars have been forged in China made with base metal. Careful testing or purchasing from known dealers or buying sealed and certified coins may be necessary to avoid these fakes.

Morgan|Silver and Related Dollar|1878|1921|The Morgan dollar was a United States dollar coin minted from 1878 to 1904, and then again in 1921. It was the first standard silver dollar minted since production of the previous design, the Seated Liberty dollar, ceased due to the passage of the Coinage Act of 1873, which also ended the free coining of silver. The coin is named for its designer, United States Mint Assistant Engraver George T!! Morgan. Morgan's initial M is found at the truncation of the neck, at the last tress. It also appears on the reverse on the left-hand loop of the ribbon. The obverse depicts a profile portrait representing Liberty, while the reverse depicts an eagle with wings outstretched.^^^^The dollar was authorized by the Bland–Allison Act. Following the passage of the 1873 act, mining interests lobbied to restore free silver, which would require the Mint to accept all silver presented to it and return it, struck into coin. Instead, the Bland–Allison Act was passed, which required the Treasury to purchase between two and four million dollars worth of silver at market value to be coined into dollars each month. In 1890, the Bland–Allison Act was repealed by the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, which required the Treasury to purchase 4,500,000 troy ounces (140,000 kg) of silver each month, but only required further silver dollar production for one year. This act, in turn, was repealed in 1893.^^^^In 1898, Congress approved a bill that required all remaining bullion purchased under the Sherman Silver Purchase Act to be coined into silver dollars. When in 1904, those silver reserves were depleted, the Mint ceased to strike the Morgan dollar. The Pittman Act, passed in 1918, authorized the melting and recoining of millions of silver dollars. Pursuant to the act, Morgan dollars resumed mintage for one year in 1921. The design was replaced by the Peace dollar later the same year.^^^^In the early 1960s, a large quantity of uncirculated Morgan dollars was found to be available from Treasury vaults, including issues once thought rare. Individuals began purchasing large quantities of the pieces at face value, and eventually the Treasury ceased to exchange silver certificates for silver coin. Beginning in the 1970s, the Treasury conducted a sale of silver dollars minted at the Carson City Mint through the General Services Administration. In 2006, Morgan's reverse design was used on a silver dollar issued to commemorate the old San Francisco Mint building.

Peace|Silver and Related Dollar|1921|1935|The Peace dollar is a United States dollar coin minted from 1921 to 1928, and again in 1934 and 1935. Designed by Anthony de Francisci, the coin was the result of a competition to find designs emblematic of peace. Its reverse depicts a Bald Eagle at rest clutching an olive branch, with the legend \"Peace\". Anthony de Francisci's monogram is located in the field of the coin under the neck of Liberty. It was the last United States dollar coin to be struck for circulation in silver.^^^^With the passage of the Pittman Act in 1918, the United States Mint was required to strike millions of silver dollars, and began to do so in 1921, using the Morgan dollar design. Numismatists began to lobby the Mint to issue a coin that memorialized the peace following World War I; although they failed to get Congress to pass a bill requiring the redesign, they were able to persuade government officials to take action. The Peace dollar was approved by Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon in December 1921, completing the redesign of United States coinage that had begun in 1907.^^^^The public believed the announced design, which included a broken sword, was illustrative of defeat, and the Mint hastily acted to remove the sword. The Peace dollar was first struck on December 28, 1921; just over a million were coined bearing a 1921 date. When the Pittman Act requirements were met in 1928, the mint ceased to strike the coins, but more were struck in 1934 and 1935 as a result of other legislation. In 1965, the mint struck over 300,000 Peace dollars bearing a 1964 date, but these were never issued, and all are believed to have been melted.

Eisenhower|Silver and Related Dollar|1971|1978|Honoring both President Dwight D!! Eisenhower and the first landing of man on the moon, this design is the work of Chief Engraver Frank Gasparro, whose initials are on the truncation and below the eagle. The reverse is an adaptation of the official Apollo 11 insignia.

Susan B. Anthony|Silver and Related Dollar|1979|1999|The Susan B!! Anthony dollar is a United States coin minted from 1979 to 1981, and again in 1999. It depicts women's suffrage campaigner Susan B!! Anthony on a dollar coin. It was the first circulating U!!S!! coin with the portrait of an actual woman rather than an allegorical female figure such as 'Liberty'. The reverse depicts an eagle flying above the moon (with the Earth in the background), a design adapted from the Apollo 11 mission insignia that was also present on the previously issued Eisenhower Dollar. It was one of the most unpopular coins in American history.

Sacagawea|Silver and Related Dollar|2000|2008|The design of the coin was selected in a national competition from among 120 submissions that were considered by a panel appointed by Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin. The adopted motif depicts Sacagawea, a young Native American Shoshone, as rendered by artist Glenna Goodacre. On her back she carries Jean Baptiste, her infant son. The reverse shows an eagle in flight, designed by Mint engraver Thomas D!! Rogers Sr.^^^^The composition exemplifies the spirit of Liberty, Peace, and Freedom shown by Sacagawea in her conduct as interpreter and guide to explorers Meriwether Lewis and William Clark during their famed journey westward from the great northern plains to the Pacific.^^^^These coins have a distinctive golden color and a plain edge to distinguish them from other denominations or coins of a similar size. The change in composition and appearance was mandated under the United States Dollar Coin Act of 1997.^^^^Several distinctive finishes can be identified on the Sacagawea dollars as a result of the Mint attempting to adjust the dies, blanks, strikes, or finishing to produce coins with minimal spotting and a better surface color. One group of 5,000 pieces dated 2000 with a special finish were presented to sculptor Glenna Goodacre in payment for the obverse design. Unexplained error coins made from mismatched dies (a state quarter obverse combined with a Sacagawea dollar reverse) are extremely rare.

Presidential|Silver and Related Dollar|2007|2016|Four different coins, each bearing the image of a former U!!S!! President, are issued each year in order that the presidents served. The size and composition of these coins is the same as that of the Sacagawea dollars that are also made each year. A companion series of $10 gold bullion coins honors the spouse of each president.


Flowing Hair|Half Dollar|1794|1795|The Flowing Hair Half Dollar was among the first of all silver coins to be struck at the Philadelphia Mint. The series was issued for only two years from 1794 to 1795 and survivors are scarce, particularly for the lower mintage first year of issue. The Flowing Hair design of the coin is shared by the contemporary silver dollars and half dimes, but the half dollar is considered by many to be the most affordable option to acquire an example of this historic design, which circulated in the young nation.^^^^The coins were designed by Robert Scot. The obverse of the Flowing Hair Half Dollar features the head of Liberty, facing right. Her hair is flowing back, as if in a gentle breeze, with no ornamentation or decoration. The truncation of the neck is relatively high compared to later designs. Fifteen stars, representing the number of states in the Union at the time, appear are positioned with eight to the left and seven to the right. The word \"Liberty\" appears above and the date below.^^^^The reverse of the coins carried a design that would be used on all of the silver coinage of the United States for a number of years. An American Bald Eagle is seen, perched on a cloud, with wings spread. The eagle is enclosed by a wreath, slightly open at the top and having two ribbons near the bottom. The words \"United States of America\" appear surrounding, starting to the left of the wreath near the bottom and ending on the opposite side.^^^^As every die for the Flowing Hair Half Dollar was handmade, many different varieties exist. The placement of the obverse stars, date, eagle, and lettering are all taken for the purposes of identification. Alongside later half dollar designs, this type is often collected by die variety, with large premiums paid for the scarcest varieties.

Draped Bust|Half Dollar|1796|1807|The Draped Bust Half Dollar was struck between the years 1796 and 1807 with two different reverses. When considered separately, the first reverse issued from 1796 to 1797 featuring a small eagle is considered one of the most famous types in all of American numismatics due to its rarity. The second reverse issued from 1801 to 1807 featuring the heraldic eagle is more available due to higher mintages. Virtually all dates for the series are scarce to very rare in uncirculated condition.^^^^The main objective of the early United States Mint in Philadelphia was not only to turn out an adequate supply of copper, silver, and gold coinage, but also to make them more or less similar in appearance. The design that was introduced on the various denominations in 1796 was created by Robert Scot, first Chief Engraver of the United States Mint, based on work by Gilbert Stuart. It is believed, although not proven, that the image used to design Liberty was based on a portrait of the Philadelphia woman Ann Willing Bingham. A Gilbert Stuart sketch of Bingham at age 21 is pictured below.^^^^The obverse of the Draped Bust Half Dollar features the head of Liberty, facing right. The partially visible bust is draped, hence the name given to this design in the 19th century, which continues to be used today. The word LIBERTY appears above, and the date appears below. An arrangement of stars appear behind and in front of Liberty.^^^^The half dollars issued in 1796 had either fifteen or sixteen stars. The additional star was added after Tennessee became the sixteenth state of the Union in June 1796. Interestingly, the 1797 half dollars once again featured only fifteen stars, followed by a gap in production. When the denomination resumed in 1801 only thirteen stars were used to represent the original thirteen states in the Union.^^^^The initial reverse design for Draped Bust Half Dollars features a modified reverse based on earlier work by Scot, which had previously been used for half dimes, half dollars, and silver dollars from 1794 and 1795. An American Bald Eagle is pictured at center, encircled by a wreath with the top slightly open. The eagle is seen standing on clouds, just above a ribbon which holds together both sides of the wreath. Beneath the ribbon is the fraction \"1/2\" to indicate the value of the coin. The words UNITED STATES OF AMERICA surround at the rim. This is the so-called \"small eagle\" reverse used for coins dated 1796 and 1797.^^^^The denomination was not produced again until 1801. During the hiatus, a new reverse design had been introduced the other silver denominations, which would be adopted for the half dollar as well. The reverse used from 1801 to 1807 is known as the \"heraldic eagle\" reverse. The eagle is viewed from the front with wings and claws spread. One of the eagle's talons grasp a bundle of arrows and an olive branch, while its beak hold a ribbon with the inscription E PLURIBUS UNUM. Thirteen stars and an arch of clouds appears above the eagle. The words UNITED STATES OF AMERICA encircle the image, with the denomination indicated on the edge of the coin.


Capped Bust, Lettered Edge|Half Dollar|1807|1836|John Reich designed this capped-head concept of Liberty. Reich's design of Liberty facing left was used on all U!!S!! silver denominations for the next 30 years.

Capped Bust, Reeded Edge|Half Dollar|1836|1839|On half dollars of 1838 and 1839, the mintmark appears on the obverse; on those thereafter, through 1915, it is on the reverse.

Liberty Seated|Half Dollar|1839|1891|Christian Gobrecht's Seated Liberty design was adopted for U!!S!! silver dollars in 1836; in 1839, the half dollar became the last silver denomination to use it. The coin's obverse features a full portrait of Lady Liberty seated on a stone, with a heraldic shield marked \"Liberty\" in her right hand and a pole with a liberty cap on the top in her left. The reverse depicts an eagle similar to that on earlier half dollars.^^^^Seated Liberty half dollars were issued from 1839 to 1891 and went through several variations over this time period. The first change came late in 1839, when an extra piece of drapery was added to Lady Liberty's left elbow; half dollars without this extra drapery are rare. In 1842, the coin changed again when the letters on its reverse were increased in size.^^^^An even bigger change was introduced in 1853. Because of the sudden increase in the supply of gold thanks to the California Gold Rush, the price of silver compared to that of gold rose dramatically—gold was now less scarce and less valuable. As a result, more and more people were hoarding silver coins and melting them down because their silver content was now worth more than the face value of the coin itself. America faced a shortage of change as coins disappeared from circulation.^^^^To combat this trend, Mint Director George N!! Eckert proposed a plan that Congress passed on February 21, 1853. This action reduced the weight of half dollars from 206 ¼ grains to 192 grains: if the coins were lighter (and had less silver), their precious metal content would not be worth more than their face value, which would discourage the hoarding of coins and their destruction.^^^^To indicate the reduced metal content without having to design a new coin, the Mint added two arrows around the date on the obverse, plus rays around the eagle on the reverse. These rays were discontinued in 1854 because the design took too long and cost too much to mint; the arrows were discontinued in 1855. In 1856, half dollars returned to their original Seated Liberty design but maintained their new lighter weight.^^^^A decade later, in 1866, Congress added the motto \"In God We Trust\" to the reverse in a ribbon above the eagle. This motto first appeared two years earlier on two-cent coins as a result of increased religious fervor during the Civil War, and it would become more and more common on U!!S!! coins as the years passed.^^^^In 1873 and 1874, Seated Liberty coins again included arrows around the obverse date, this time to indicate an increase in weight from 192 grains to 192!!9 grains. Rays were not added. From 1875 to 1891, the Mint returned to the variation introduced in 1866. In 1892, Charles Barber's new half dollar coin design replaced Gobrecht's Seated Liberty.

Barber or Liberty Head|Half Dollar|1892|1915|Like the dime and quarter dollar, this type was designed by Charles E!! Barber, whose initial B is on the truncation of the neck.

Liberty Walking|Half Dollar|1916|1947|This type was designed by Adolph A!! Weinman, whose monogram, AW, appears under the tip of the tail feathers. On the 1916 coins and some of the 1917 coins, the mintmark is located on the obvertse below the motto.

Franklin|Half Dollar|1948|1963|The Benjamin Franklin half dollar and the Roosevelt dime were both designed by John R!! Simmock. His initials appear below the shoulder.

Kennedy|Half Dollar|1964|0|Gilroy Roberts, then chief engraver of the Mint, designed the obverse of this coin. His stylized initials are on the truncation of the forceful bust of President John F!! Kennedy. The reverse, which uses the eagle from the presidential seal for the motif, is the work of assistant engraver Frank Gasparro.



Draped Bust|Quarter|1796|1807|The first quarter dollars struck in the United States were the Draped Bust Quarters. This series was produced with two distinctive reverse designs, creating two rare and important subtypes. The first of these was struck in a single year in 1796, also representing the first year for the denomination. Following a gap in production, the second reverse design was used from 1804 until the conclusion of the series in 1807. Only a limited number of coins were produced during the brief duration of the series, with both the 1796 and 1804 dates being rarities. The remaining dates of 1805, 1806, and 1807 are a bit more available, but far from common.^^^^The Draped Bust Quarter had been introduced four years after the Mint Act of 1792 and three years after the first coins were struck under the Act. This was the result of the limited demand for the denomination within the American monetary system at the time. For everyday commerce, the quarter dollar was just a little too large, as most transactions were conducted in cents and other small denominations. Silver depositors, who requested their metal to be struck into federal coinage at the Mint, usually requested larger denominations, which were more convenient. Most transactions between banks and companies were conducted in larger denominations as well.^^^^The first quarter dollars were designed by Robert Scot, who is also credited with the designs of other early American coins.  The silver denominations introduced in 1794 and 1795 featured the head of Liberty with flowing hair. The quarter dollars introduced in 1796 featured what was seen as an improvement to that design.  The full bust of Liberty is depicted, older in appearance and facing right. Her hair is still flowing, but closer to her neck and loosely bound by a ribbon. The portrait is surrounded by fifteen stars, representing each of the states in the Union at the time. The date, slightly curved, is near the bottom, along the rim.^^^^The original reverse of the Draped Bust Quarter featured the same design that had been introduced on the half dollars and silver dollars of 1794. An eagle appears with wings spread, placed within a field free from other parts of the design. A wreath surrounds, with UNITED STATES OF AMERICA around the periphery of the coin. No denomination is given, as was the case with all other early American coins. The only possibility to make the distinction between the various denominations was through the size of the coin, and in some instances the edge.^^^^Production of the first reverse type occurred for only a single year in 1796. Further minting of the denomination did not occur until 1804, when a different reverse design was introduced. The obverse was not altered, except for the number of stars, which was reduced to thirteen. The new reverse, designed by Robert Scot, was completely different in appearance than the original.^^^^An eagle was still featured in the central part of the design, no longer in natural state, but rather in heraldic form. A large shield is placed in front of the eagle, with an olive branch in one claw and a bundle of arrows in the other. Thirteen stars appear above the eagle’s head, and a ribbon is held in the eagle’s beak with the inscription E PLURIBUS UNUM. A number of clouds appear above the stars, and inscriptions UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and 25 C. surround the image.

Capped Bust|Quarter|1815|1838|The quarter denomination saw the resumption of production following an eight year hiatus with the Capped Bust Quarter series. The design was notably different from the early quarter dollars, which had been struck in limited quantities. Although mintages for the new series were more plentiful, it can still be a challenge for collectors to find examples in mint state grades. In 1831, the diameter of the denomination was reduced and the design was slightly altered, creating two subtypes for the series.^^^^The quarter dollar denomination, first struck in 1796, was one which had fallen out of order in the early 19th century. For everyday use, it was considered to be too large, as most business was conducted with cents and half cents. For financial transactions, banks preferred to request half dollars from the Mint, which represented the largest denomination in production during the 1810′s. The final issue of the previous quarter dollar series was struck in 1807, and the denomination was not produced again until after the conclusion of the War of 1812, which had created a great shortage of coinage in the country.^^^^The design for the Capped Bust Quarter was created by German immigrant John Reich, who had been hired as an assistant to Robert Scot. It was Reich’s first task in 1807 to redesign circulating coinage, however the quarter would have to wait 1815 for the new design to be introduced. The obverse features a familiar bust of Liberty, facing left. She is wearing a cap, often referred to as a Phrygian or Freedom Cap, with a band inscribed with the word LIBERTY. On both sides are stars, seven left and six right, representing the original thirteen states. The date appears below, slightly curved.^^^^The reverse features a design which would be found on circulating coins into the late 19th century. A bald eagle with wings spread is seen at the center, with a bundle of arrows and an olive branch in its claws. On the eagle’s breast is a large shield, with horizontal and vertical lines. A scroll is included above with the inscription E PLURIBUS UNUM. Starting closely above the eagle’s right wing is the inscription UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, which ends next to the other wing. The denomination is found below, expressed as 25 C. This represented the first time the value was indicated on the quarter dollar denomination.^^^^The Capped Bust Quarter featuring the original design was struck from 1815 to 1828. After a hiatus in production of three years, a modified design would be introduced in 1831. The coins were smaller in diameter, with details more finely executed and smaller dentils around the edge of the coin. The most notable change was the removal of the scroll bearing the E PLURIBUS UNUM motto on the reverse of the coin. These design changes were made by William Kneass, successor to Scot as the Chief Engraver at the Mint. The design changes also coincided with the relocation of the Mint to a new building and the acquisition of improved machinery.^^^^Without doubt, the earlier type Capped Bust Quarters are the scarcer type of the two, and all rarities are within that series. Uncirculated examples of the earlier type are very scarce, while examples from the 1830′s can be found with some searching.^^^^Proof versions of the coins exist, with the first examples struck in 1820. Production of proofs was irregular, often not recorded, and they are now of the greatest rarity. Offerings are seldom and the status of some are disputed, so careful examination is recommended.

Liberty Seated|Quarter|1838|1891|In 1835, when it was time for the U!!S!! Mint’s new engraver, Christian Gobrecht, to redesign the quarter and other coins, he chose to seat Lady Liberty on a rock. In her left hand, he placed a pole topped by a Liberty cap, a symbol during that era of freedom. Leaning against the rock and steadied by her right hand, Gobrecht placed a shield emblazoned with the word \"Liberty\" in capital letters.^^^^A similar shield, but without the word, crowned the breast of an eagle on the coin’s reverse. Below the eagle was the abbreviation \"QUAR!! DOL!!\"^^^^Seated Liberty Quarters featured the same design as the half dimes, dimes, half dollars, and dollars of the mid-19th century. The dollars came first in 1836, with the quarters following in 1838. Decades later, the Seated Liberty design even appeared on the short-lived (1875-1878) twenty-cent piece.^^^^Almost half a million coins were struck in 1838 when the new quarter debuted. The Seated Liberty coins were considered an aesthetic and technical improvement on the Bust quarters that preceded them, but officials at the mint couldn’t leave well enough alone.

Barber or Liberty Head|Quarter|1892|1916|The Barber Quarter was introduced in 1892, after more than five decades of use for the previous Seated Liberty motif. The new deign featuring the head of Liberty on the obverse would be adopted for the dime, quarter, and half dollar. The series of Barber Quarters, minted continuously from 1892 until 1916, consists of 74 circulation strike issues and an additional 24 proof issues for all years up to 1915. With the exception of three rare issues, the series is very collectible, although much overlooked until recent times.^^^^The story of the Barber Quarter began in 1887, when Mint director James B!! Kimball included a short request within his annual report to alter the circulating coin designs. The public had become tired of them, and many considered the Liberty Seated design to be of inferior quality, especially for a nation as grand as the United States. Nothing happened until 1890, when the Treasury Department contacted ten prominent artists for the purpose of designing new silver coinage. The cost to hire one of these artists far exceeded what the Treasury Department was willing to spend, and the idea was soon abandoned.^^^^Eventually, new designs for the three smallest silver denomination would be created by the Chief Engraver of the Mint, Charles E!! Barber. Both he and Assistant Engraver George T!! Morgan had wanted to create the designs, and the competition between the two men which had started many years earlier continued here as well. According to some people, there are still similarities between the two designers, as Breen put it in his Encyclopedia in his typical language:^^^^“Barber’s new obverse was a mirror image of the Morgan dollar head, with most of Ms!! Anna Witless Williams cropped off and the rest modestly concealed within her enlarged cap.”^^^^The design of the Barber Quarter, which was submitted in October of 1891, features a bust of Liberty on the obverse, facing right. She is wearing a Phrygian cap, with the word LIBERTY on the hair band. IN GOD WE TRUST is above the head with the date beneath the truncation of the neck and the designers initial “B” on the truncation. There are 13 stars representing the original states are surrounding the image, configured six to the left and seven to the right.^^^^On the reverse of the coin is the image of an eagle with its wings spread, holding arrows in one claw and an olive branch in the other. A scroll within its beak contains the motto E PLURIBUS UNUM. Above the eagle are another 13 stars, and inscriptions UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and the denomination QUARTER DOLLAR are around. The first year of the series, 1892, had dies made from two different reverse hubs. The first has the Eagle’s left wing covering only half of the “E” in UNITED. The second variety has the wing covering most of the letter. In 1900 a new obverse hub was introduced, and in 1901 a new reverse hub was introduced as well, but few collectors have noticed this change and it is not often mentioned in literature.

Standing Liberty|Quarter|1916|1930|The Standing Liberty quarter was a 25-cent coin struck by the United States Mint from 1916 to 1930. It succeeded the Barber quarter, which had been minted since 1892. Featuring the goddess of Liberty on one side and an eagle in flight on the other, the coin was designed by sculptor Hermon Atkins MacNeil.^^^^In 1915, Director of the Mint Robert W!! Woolley, set in motion efforts to replace the Barber dime, quarter, and half dollar, as he mistakenly believed that the law required new designs. MacNeil submitted a militaristic design that showed Liberty on guard against attacks. The Mint required modifications to the initial design, and MacNeil's revised version included dolphins to represent the oceans. In late 1916, Mint officials made major changes to the design without consulting MacNeil. The sculptor complained about the changes after receiving the new issue in January 1917. The Mint obtained special legislation to allow MacNeil to redesign the coin as he desired. One change made by the sculptor was the addition of a chain mail vest that covered Liberty's formerly bare breast.^^^^In circulation, the coin's date wore away quickly, and Mint engravers modified the design to address the issue in 1925. The Standing Liberty quarter was discontinued in 1931, a year in which no quarters were struck, when Congress passed an act that placed George Washington's profile on the quarter to celebrate the 1932 bicentennial of his birth.

Washington|Quarter|1932|0|The Washington quarter is the present quarter dollar or 25-cent piece issued by the United States Mint. The coin was first struck in 1932; the original version was designed by sculptor John Flanagan.^^^^As the United States prepared to celebrate the 1932 bicentennial of the birth of its first president, George Washington, members of the bicentennial committee established by Congress sought a Washington half dollar. They wanted to displace for that year only the regular issue Walking Liberty half dollar; instead Congress permanently replaced the Standing Liberty quarter, requiring that a depiction of Washington appear on the obverse of the new coin. The committee had engaged sculptor Laura Gardin Fraser to design a commemorative medal, and wanted her to adapt her design for the quarter. Although Fraser's work was supported by the Commission of Fine Arts and its chairman, Charles W!! Moore, Treasury Secretary Andrew W. Mellon chose a design by Flanagan, and Mellon's successor, Ogden L!! Mills, refused to disturb the decision.^^^^The new silver quarters entered circulation on August 1, 1932; they were struck in that metal until the Mint transitioned to copper-nickel clad coinage in 1965. A special reverse commemorating the United States Bicentennial was used in 1975 and 1976, with all pieces bearing the double date 1776–1976; there are no 1975-dated quarters. Since 1999, the original eagle reverse has not been used; instead that side of the quarter has commemorated the 50 states, the nation's other jurisdictions, and National Park Service sites—the last as part of the America the Beautiful Quarters series, which will continue until 2021. The bust of Washington was made smaller beginning in 1999; in 2010 it was restored to bring out greater detail.


Liberty Seated|Twenty-Cent Piece|1875|1878|Business-strike issues of the twenty-cent pieces were only produced for two years, 1875 and 1876. The denomination continued for two years after business strike production halted, through 1878, with Proof-only issues struck at the Philadelphia Mint.^^^^The U!!S!! Mint used Christian Gobrecht’s Liberty Seated design for the obverse on twenty-cent pieces, although there are pattern examples known. The reverse of this denomination features a standing eagle, similar in design to the one used on the U!!S!! Trade dollar. The eagle lacks the scrollwork found on examples of Liberty Seated quarters, half dollars, and dollars.^^^^The most famous and the rarest twenty-cent piece is the one issued at the Carson City Mint in 1876.


Draped Bust|Dime|1796|1807|The dime was one of the last denominations introduced in the United States, although the coins would hold an important place within the monetary system. The first type was known as the Draped Bust Dime, which carried the so-called small eagle reverse in 1796 and 1797 before adopting the heraldic eagle reverse from 1798 until the conclusion of the series in 1807. Ranging in rarity from very scarce to extremely rare, these early dimes are not easily obtainable, particularly in problem free condition.^^^^As Walter Breen mentions in his Encyclopedia, dimes were of great importance to the \"crucial test of whether the federal coinage system would be fully decimalized as Congress intended\". With a value of one tenth of a dollar, the coins would be the cornerstone of the American decimal system signed into law by the Coinage Act of 1792. This act called for a dime (or disme, the usual spelling at the time) weighing 41!!6 grains and struck in standard silver, defined as 1485 parts pure silver to 179 parts copper. The design was required to contain an image emblematic of Liberty on the obverse and an eagle on the reverse.^^^^The obverse of the Draped Bust Dime features a bust of Liberty, facing right. The image of Liberty is identified by some as Ann Wiling Bingham of Philadelphia, although this identification is disputed and unconfirmed. As the name implies, Liberty's bust is draped, while her hair is tied together with a ribbon. The word LIBERTY is above her head, and a number of stars are placed to the left and right. On the 1796 issue, there are fifteen stars. Two different star varieties exist for the 1797 issue, one with sixteen stars (following the admission of Tennessee to the Union) and the other with thirteen stars. It was decided that the Mint could not add stars indefinitely for every State that joined the Union, so the number was set at thirteen to represent the original thirteen states. All later issues of this type would only future thirteen obverse stars.^^^^The first reverse, used only in 1796 and 1797, was a modification of an earlier design that had been employed on the flowing hair design, used on various denominations in 1794 and 1795. A small eagle, with its wings spread is seen in the center, enclosed by an olive wreath. Two small ribbons are seen near the bottom of the design. The eagle appears to be standing on some clouds. The only other design feature that can be seen on this type is UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, starting to the left of the ribbons and ending to the right. This design would soon be replaced, and this type is now considered to be the most difficult type to acquire within the dime series, with a total mintage of less than 50,000 coins.^^^^The new reverse for the Draped Bust Dime was also designed by Scot, and was also introduced on the other silver denominations of same period. It features a heraldic eagle, viewed from the front, with a large shield at its breast. In the eagle’s beck is a ribbon, inscribed with E PLURIBUS UNUM. Above the eagle’s head is a cluster and clouds, and between the clouds and the eagle are thirteen stars. Some interesting varieties of 1798 and 1804 have a different count of stars, but this does not appear to have been done intentionally. Near the bottom of the design, the eagle’s claw grasp a bundle of arrows and an olive branch. The only design feature that remained from the small eagle reverse is UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. On either of the two varieties there is no indication of the denomination.^^^^Robert Scot, the first engraver at the Philadelphia Mint, created the Draped Bust design based on the work of portraitist Gilbert Stuart. This design was used across early copper and silver coinage issued during the era.

Capped Bust|Dime|1809|1837|Dimes were not produced in 1808, but production resumed in 1809, with a new design known as the Capped Bust Dime. A similar design had first been introduced in 1807 on the half dollar and was slowly placed on the other denominations, one at the time. The design would be struck in two different varieties, from 1809 to 1828 with large dentils and a wide border, and from 1828 to 1837 with smaller dentils, among other minor design modifications. This was the result of more modern machinery at the Mint, which was introduced shortly before the modifications were made.^^^^The first dimes, or ten-cent pieces, had been struck in 1796, two years after the first silver coins were produced by the US Mint in Philadelphia. Mintages in the late 18th and early 19th century were small but growing, and by 1807, the largest annual mintage up to that point had been produced at 165,000 pieces. No dimes would be struck in 1808, but production of the denomination resumed in 1809. The previous Draped Bust design was replaced by the so-called Capped Bust design by John Reich, a German immigrant who had been hired as assistant engraver to Robert Scot.^^^^The obverse design of the Capped Bust Dime featured a bust of Liberty, facing left. She is wearing a cap, usually mentioned in literature as a Phrygian or Freedom Cap, a symbol used in the Revolutionary War and dating back to the ancient Greece. The symbol had become popular again in France in the 18th century and would continue to be featured on coins of the United States well into the 19th century. The inscription LIBERTY is seen on a headband which is placed on the cap. Thirteen stars, representing the original thirteen states in the Union are seen, arranged seven left and six right. The date, slightly curved as usual, is seen under the truncation of the bust which features a small part of Liberty’s dress.^^^^The reverse featured the same design as used in common on the larger denominations throughout the 19th century. An American Eagle is seen, with its wings spread and a large shield at its breast. The eagle holds a bundle of arrows and an olive branch in its claws. On a scroll, placed above the eagle’s head is the motto E PLURIBUS UNUM. Starting at the left of the eagle’s right wingtip is UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, which ends to the right of the other wingtip. Finally, the denomination, as 10 C!! is seen at the base, representing the first time the denomination was inscribed on the ten cent piece.^^^^This design would essentially remain the same until 1837, although major modifications took place in 1828. William Kneass, who had been the successor of Scot and joined the Mint’s team in 1805, modified the design after modern machinery had been installed at the Mint. The size of the dime was slightly reduced, some minor modifications to the design were employed, and the dentils were decreased in size. As a result, the Capped Bust Dimes of the second variety are more standardized, usually of higher quality, and were struck in larger quantities. This modified design would be struck for ten years, until replaced by the Seated Liberty design by Christian Gobrecht, which would be seen on this denomination for most of the remaining years of the 19th century.

Liberty Seated|Dime|1837|1891|From the earliest days of the United States Mint, uniformity had been sought within coinage designs. For the first several decades in operation, this goal had been met with variable success. While most designs were fairly similar, small differences were often noted and because of the rapid pace of design changes, the uniformity was often short lived. The first true success in attaining this goal came in the 1830’s when Christian Gobrecht created the Liberty Seated design for use on silver coinage from the half dime to silver dollar. His design was based on a sketch prepared by Thomas Sully, which depicted Liberty seated on a rock, drawing inspiration from the depiction of Britannia on contemporary British coins. The Liberty Seated Dimes featuring this design range from common to ultra rarities and have become a series with a large and growing number of devoted collectors.^^^^The original obverse design for the series featured an image of Liberty seated on a rock, looking over her left shoulder and behind. In one hand she holds a pole with a Phyrigian or Freedom cap on top of it, while the other hand rests on a shield with the inscription LIBERTY on a scroll. The reverse design featured  a wreath of laurel tied with a bow at the base. The inscription UNITED STATES OF AMERICA appears around and the denomination ONE DIME is within. The obverse design was previously used on silver dollars dated 1836 and would remain in use in somewhat modified form until the early 1890′s.^^^^After the first year of production for the Liberty Seated Dime, the first design modification would occur. Thirteen stars, representing the original thirteen states, were added to the obverse. The new design would be introduced in Philadelphia in 1838, where both large and small star varieties exist. In 1839, the stars were also added to the obverse dies that were being sent to the New Orleans Mint, the only branch mint producing silver coinage at the time.^^^^In 1840, another design change occurred, in order to improve the production quality of these coins. The most noticeable change was the addition of drapery at Liberty’s elbow, although other small alterations were made to the obverse. This design would remain in use until 1853.^^^^Proofs of these two varieties are sometimes available, but very rare (especially of the no-drapery type of 1838-1840), in virtually all grades. For some years, no Proof strikings are known to exist, while for other years only a few undisputed Proofs have been verified. Proof dimes dated 1838 to 1841 are represented by only a single example, the latter which even in circulated condition.^^^^At this point in the series, the silver content was reduced, a measure which was meant to improve circulation of silver coinage. To denote the change in weight, arrows were placed to either side of the date. Coins were struck with arrows in 1853, 1854 and 1855, representing an important subtype of the Liberty Seated dime series. Proofs were also struck of this variety and like the 1837 no stars Proof, are very important as type coins for advanced collectors, while they are rare as well regardless of the date.^^^^In 1856, the previous design was resumed and struck until 1860. That year, the Philadelphia Mint introduced another design change for the Liberty Seated Dime. Although the seated figure of Liberty remained on the obverse, most other aspects were redesigned by James Barton Longacre. On the obverse, the previously present thirteen stars were removed and replaced with the inscription UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. The reverse design was completely redesigned, with the previous laurel wreath with an agricultural wreath. The denomination, ONE DIME was still inscribed at center, but in a  taller font. In both 1859 and 1860 fantasy pieces were produced, struck using the obverse die of the previous type. While these are not official mint issues, they are popular with collectors since the pieces curiously do not list the name of the country from which they are issued.^^^^One more design change occurred in 1873, when arrows were once again placed to either side of the date. This time the arrows signified a slight increase in weight, following another adjustment to the silver content of the coins.^^^^Proofs of these two varieties, legend obverse dimes were specifically produced for collectors in reasonable quantities, and most dates are more or less easily acquired. In business strike condition some issues are major rarities, such as those from the Carson City Mint dated 1871-1874, with one of the most famous being the unique 1873-CC No Arrows Dime, the sole survivor from an original mintage of 12,400 coins struck before the change of weight was authorized. Other dates are readily available in all grades, up to the gem level, although some intensive searching might be required to find problem-free examples with good-eye appeal.

Barber or Liberty Head|Dime|1892|1916|This type was designed by Charles E!! Barber, chief engraver of the Mint. His initial B is at the truncation of the neck. He also designed the quarters and half dollars of this same period.

Winged Liberty Head or Mercury|Dime|1916|1945|Although this coin is commonly called the Mercury dime, the main device is in fact a representation of Liberty. The wings crowning her cap are intended to symbolize liberty of thought. The designer's monogram AW is at the right of the neck.

Roosevelt|Dime|1946|0|John R!! Sinnock (whose initials, JS, are at the truncation of the neck) designed this dime showing a portrait of Franklin D!! Roosevelt. The design has heavier lettering and a more modernistic character than preceding types.



Flowing Hair|Half Dime|1794|1795|The Flowing Hair Half Dime is found with only two dates, which were actually both struck in a single year. These pieces were the smallest silver coins authorized by the Mint Act of 1792. The coins were first produced in February or March 1795, from dies dated 1794.^^^^Examples are mostly encountered in lower grades with various problems, while high grade specimens with original surfaces are extremely rare. Despite their rarity, these coins are not as expensive as the larger denominations, although this does not mean that they are easily found in any condition. The Flowing Hair Half Dime represents an important type coin and one of the more difficult coins to acquire for an advanced type set.^^^^The half dimes feature Robert Scot’s Flowing Hair design on the obverse, paired with an eagle surrounded by a wreath on the reverse. The edge of the coin was reeded, and the coin carried no indication of the denomination.^^^^This site provides a basic history of the series, description of the design, information on the mintage, specifications, and the details of the two years of release for this important series.

Draped Bust|Half Dime|1796|1805|The second type for half dimes, the lowest silver denomination authorized by the Mint Act of 1792, was the Draped Bust Half Dime. The series is divided into two different subtypes, identified by the reverse design. The first subtype was produced in 1796 and 1797, and portrays a small eagle on the reverse. The second, introduced in 1800 and struck until 1805, portrays a large heraldic eagle on the reverse.^^^^The obverse design for the entire series features the bust of Liberty, designed by Robert Scot. The image is said to have been proposed by Gilbert Stuart and based on Philadelphia resident Ann Willing Bingham. While this statement is accepted as fact by some, others consider it to simply be numismatic rumor. The image of Liberty is facing right with hair lightly bound in a ribbon. Her bust visible and partially draped, hence the name given to the design. The inscription \"LIBERTY\" appears above and the date below. The design is completed by stars representing states in the Union, either fifteen in number (1795, 1796 and some 1797 varieties), sixteen (some 1797 varieties after Tennessee was admitted as the 16th state to the Union) or thirteen (a minority of 1797 dated half dimes).^^^^The so-called \"small eagle\" reverse issued from 1796-1797 features an eagle viewed from the front, in a somewhat natural state, inside a wreath bound with a ribbon at the bottom. The only other design feature is the inscription \"UNITED STATES OF AMERICA\", which runs in a circle from the bottom left, around to the bottom right of the coin. No denomination is expressed, a feature on much of the early American coinage.^^^^Production of Draped Bust Half Dimes would be halted in 1797 and not resumed until 1800. In the meantime, the small eagle reverse had been replaced on the other silver denominations, so it was also altered when the production of half dimes resumed. The so-called \"heraldic eagle\" reverse featured an eagle which was more stylistic and less natural in appearance. A large shield is placed at the eagle’s breast and a ribbon in its beak, with the inscription \"E PLURIBUS UNUM\". In one claw there is a bundle of arrows, and in the other is an olive branch. A cluster of clouds is placed above the eagle, with an arrangement of thirteen small stars between the clouds and the eagle. The inscription \"UNITED STATES OF AMERICA\" surrounds the image.^^^^Many different varieties exist throughout the Draped Bust Half Dime series, both major and minor, with several listed in the Red Book. While variety collecting for this series is not as widespread as the larger denominations, some rarer varieties trade at substantial premiums. The scarcest regular issue occurred in 1802 when a mintage of only 3,060 pieces was produced.

Capped Bust|Half Dime|1829|1837|Half Dimes, the smallest silver denomination authorized by the Mint Act of April 1792, were not struck from 1806 to 1828. During this time, circulation of virtually all United States federal coinage was sparse, and half dimes were of such small intrinsic value that they were not used for exportation. The need of minor silver coinage was mostly fulfilled by silver coins from around the world, most notably Mexico and South-American countries.  On July 4, 1829, coinage of the Capped Bust Half Dime commenced, coinciding with the opening of the second Philadelphia Mint. The new series of half dimes would be produced in reasonably significant quantities from 1829 to 1837, making completion of a set an approachable goal for collectors.^^^^When the Capped Bust Half Dime was introduced in 1829, all silver coins that were struck by the United States Mint featured the same basic design. The design had been introduced on the half dollars in 1807, where it saw its greatest use, but also was used on the quarter dollars starting in 1815, and dimes starting in 1828. While the design on all of these denominations varied slightly, each was based on the work by John Reich, with William Kneass modifying the designs at a later date. Because of their small size, the Capped Bust Half Dimes appear noticeably different than larger denominations.^^^^The obverse, modified by Kneass, featured the head of Liberty, facing left. She wears a Phrygian cap inscribed LIBERTY with long, curling hair beneath and a gown visible near the truncation, secured with a brooch. The date, slightly curved, is directly under the truncation of the bust and comes in various sizes. There are seven stars are before Liberty and six stars behind, for the traditional total of thirteen.^^^^The reverse featured a perched eagle, with its wings spread. A shield is placed at the eagle's breast and its talons hold an olive branch and bundle of arrows. The denomination, for the first time on these small silver coins, appears below as 5 C. The motto E PLURIBUS UNUM is on a scroll directly above the head of the eagle, and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA is spread from left to right wing tip in a curved fashion.

Liberty Seated|Half Dime|1837|1873|The Liberty Seated Half Dime was struck from 1837 to 1873. During the course of the series, there were numerous modifications to the design, which create an interesting array of subtypes. The end of the series represented the last production of silver half dimes. The denomination was replaced in commerce by the five cent nickel, which had been introduced in 1866.^^^^The obverse of the Seated Liberty Half Dime features a depiction of Liberty seated on a rock. She holds a pole in her right hand with a Phyrigian cap on top. Different subtypes of the series have the surrounding fields empty, with thirteen stars, or containing the inscription UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.^^^^The reverse of the coin features a wreath surrounding the denomination HALF DIME. For earlier subtypes, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA surrounds the wreath. For the coins with this inscription placed on the obverse, the wreath was enlarged and altered.^^^^Although this series is usually considered to be the easiest of the Liberty Seated type to complete, some issues are rare and challenging to locate in mint state grades. At the most extreme measure, the 1870-S half dime has a single example known to exist in all grades, even though none were reported to have been struck. While it usually is not considered to be part of a complete set of Seated Half Dimes it remains as one of the most famous rarities of all American coinage.



Shield|Nickel|1866|1883|The Shield type nickel was made possible by the Act of May 16, 1866. Its weight was set at 77-16/100 grains with the same composition as the nickel three-cent piece.

Liberty Head|Nickel|1883|1913|In 1883 the design was changed to the \"Liberty Head.\" This type first appeared without the word CENTS on the coin, merely a large letter V. These \"CENTS-less\" coins were goldplated by fraudsters and passed as $5 pieces. Later in that year the word CENTS was added.

Indian Head or Buffalo|Nickel|1913|1938|The Buffalo nickel was designed by James E!! Fraser, whose initial F is below the date. He modeled the bison after Black Diamond in New York Central Park Zoo.

Jefferson|Nickel|1938|0|This nickel was originally designed by Felix Schlag. He won an award of $1,000 in a competition with some 390 artists. It established the definite public approval of portrait and pictorial rather than symbolic devices on our coinage. On October 8, 1942, the wartime five-cent piece composed of copper (56%), silver (35%), and manganese (9%) was introduced to eliminate nickel, a critical war material. A larger mintmark was place above the dome. The letter P (Philadelphia) was used for the first time, indicating the change of alloy. The designer's initials FS were added below the bust starting in 1966. The mintmark position was moved to the obverse starting in 1968.



Silver - Trime|Three-Cent Piece|1851|1873|This smallest of United Stated silver coins was authorized by Congress March 3, 1851. The first three-cent silver pieces had no lines bordering the six-pointed star. From 1854 to 1858 there were two lines, while issues of the last 15 years show only one line. Issues from 1854 to 1873 have an olive sprig over the III and a bundle of three arrows beneath.

Nickel|Three-Cent Piece|1865|1889|The three-cent piece struck in nickel composition were designed to replace the silver three-cent coins. Composition is 75% copper and 25% nickel. All were coined at Philadelphia and have plain edges.


Two-Cent Piece|Two-Cent Piece|1864|1873|The Act of April 22, 1864, which changed the weight and composition of the cent, included a provision for the bronze two-cent piece. The weight was specified as 96 grains, the alloy being the same as for the cent. There are two varieties for the first year of issue, 1864: the Small Motto and the Large Motto.


Flying Eagle|Small Cent|1856|1858|The Act of February 21, 1857, provided for the coinage of the new copper-nickel small cent. The 1856 Flying Eagle cent was not an authorized Mint issue, as the law governing the new-size coin was enacted after the date of issue. It is believed that nearly 1,000 original strikings and 1,500 or more restrikes were made of the 1856. They are properly referred to as patterns.

Indian Head|Small Cent|1859|1909|The small cent was redesigned in 1858, and a representation of Miss Liberty wearing an Indian war bonnet was adopted as the obverse device. The 1859 reverse was also changed to represent a laurel wreath. In 1860 the reverse was modified to display an oak wreath with a small shield at the top. From 1859 to 1864, cents were struck in copper-nickel. In 1864, the composition was changed to bronze, although copper-nickel cents were also struck during that year.

Lincoln, Wheat Ears Reverse|Small Cent|1909|1958|Victor D!! Brenner designed this cent, which was issued to commemorate the 100th anniversary of Abraham Lincoln's birth. The designer's initials (V!!D!!B!!) appear on the reverse of a limited quantity of cents of 1909. Later in the year they were removed from the dies but restored in 1918 as very small incuse letters beneath the shoulder. The Lincoln type was the first cent to have the motto IN GOD WE TRUST.

Lincoln, Memorial Reverse|Small Cent|1959|2008|The Lincoln cent or Lincoln penny is a cent coin (or penny) (1/100 of a dollar) that has been struck by the United States Mint since 1909. The obverse or heads side was designed by Victor David Brenner, as was the original reverse. The coin has seen several reverse, or tails, designs and now bears one by Lyndall Bass depicting a Union shield.^^^^In 1905, sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens was hired by the Mint to redesign the cent and the four gold coins, which did not require congressional approval. Two of Saint-Gaudens's proposed designs for the cent were eventually adapted for the gold pieces, but Saint-Gaudens died in August 1907 before submitting additional designs for the cent. In January 1909, the Mint engaged Brenner to design a cent depicting the late President Abraham Lincoln, 1909 being the centennial year of his birth. Brenner's design was eventually approved, and the new coins were issued to great public interest on August 2, 1909.^^^^Brenner's initials (VDB), on the reverse at its base, were deemed too prominent once the coins were issued, and were removed within days of the release. The coins that were released bearing the initials VDB are the rarest of any of the Lincoln cents and fetch a high price among coin collectors. The initials were restored, this time smaller, on Lincoln's shoulder, in 1918. Brenner's reverse was replaced in 1959 by a depiction of the Lincoln Memorial designed by Frank Gasparro, for the sesquicentennial of his birth year. The Lincoln Memorial reverse was itself replaced in 2009 by commemorative designs marking the bicentennial of Lincoln's birth. Beginning in 2010, Bass's shield design was coined. Originally struck in 95% copper, the penny coin was changed for one year to steel in 1943 as copper was needed to aid in the war effort. The mint then reverted to 95% copper until 1982, when inflation made copper too expensive and the composition was changed to zinc with an outer copper layer.

Lincoln, Bicentennial|Small Cent|2009|2009|One-cent coins issued during 2009 are a unique tribute to President Abraham Lincoln, recognizing the bicentennial of his birth and the 100th anniversary of the first issuance of the Lincoln cent. These coins use four different design themes on the reverse to represent the four major aspects of President Lincoln's life. The obverse of each of these coins carries the traditional portrait of Lincoln that has been in use since 1909.^^^^The special reverse designs, released as quarterly issues throughout 2009, are described as: Birth and Early Childhood in Kentucky (designer, Richard Masters; sculptor; Jim Licaretz); Formative Years in Indiana (designer and sculptor, Charles Vickers); Professional Life in Illinois (designer, Joel Iskowitz; sculptor, Don Everhart); and Presidency in Washington (designer, Susan Gamble; sculptor, Joseph Menna). Those issued for commercial circulation are made of the exact same copper-plated composition used since 1982. Special versions included in collector sets are made of the same metallic composition as was used for the original 1909 cents (95% copper, 5% tin and zinc).

Lincoln, Shield Reverse|Small Cent|2010|0|At the conclusion of the 2009 Bicentennial One-Cent Program, future one-cent coins feature a reverse that has \"an image emblematic of President Lincoln's preservation of the United States of America as a single and united country.\" 


Flowing Hair|Large Cent|1793|1793|Henry Voight's design was almost universally criticized in its time for its unattractiveness and perceived allusion to slavery. It bears the distinction, however, of being the first official coinage minted by the federal government on its own equipment and premises. 36,103 were minted. Its low survival rate on top of a small mintage, coupled with being the first regular federal issue and a one-year design and type, has created an extremely strong demand from generations of numismatists. As a result, all surviving specimens command high prices ranging from $2,000-$3,000 in the absolute lowest state of preservation to over $500,000 in the highest.^^^^The Mint caved to the intense ridicule later in 1793, and Mint Director David Rittenhouse ordered Adam Eckfeldt to revise the obverse and reverse designs. Liberty's bust was redesigned with even longer, wilder hair, and the chain was removed from the reverse in favor of a wreath. Scholars are undecided as to what plant or plants are depicted in the wreath, with several varieties extant. Total mintage of the wreath reverse numbered about 63,000 pieces.

Liberty Cap|Large Cent|1793|1796|Rittenhouse was dissatisfied with Eckfeldt's designs, and with the criticism of the Chain cents fresh in his mind, he hired Joseph Wright to do yet another redesign in the denomination's troubled first year. Wright's design faced Liberty to the right and \"tamed\" her wild hair. The cap was added as an ancient symbol of freedom. The reverse design was revised to a recognizable laurel wreath, and future Chief Engraver Robert Scot had a hand in several minor revisions to the design over the next three years.^^^^This design was more successful and it was continued into 1796. In 1795, planchets became too thin for the edge lettering because of a weight reduction, so the mint stopped edge lettering on the cent, and the rest of these coins were made with a plain edge. Four coins from 1795 are known to have a reeded edge.

Draped Bust|Large Cent|1796|1807|Robert Scot redesigned the whole of United States coinage for 1796, applying a new design featuring a bust of Liberty wearing a drapery at the neckline and a ribbon in her flowing hair. The reverse design now featured an olive wreath. As with earlier types, several minor revisions to the design were made in the first few years, with the final 1797 design lasting through the end of the type in 1807.

Classic Head|Large Cent|1808|1814|John Reich, assistant to Chief Engraver Scot, was appointed by new Mint Director Robert Patterson to redesign Scot's Draped Bust cent (along with every other circulating coin design). The so-called \"Classic Head\" derives its name from the fillet worn by Liberty on the obverse, though the fillet was worn only by male athletes in ancient Greece. The copper used during the years in which Classic Head cents were minted was of a higher quality, containing less metallic impurity. Consequently, they were softer and more prone to wear and corrode more quickly than issues before or after. As a result, unimpaired, high-grade specimens are especially difficult to obtain and fetch strong premiums when they appear on market, especially with original red or red-brown mint luster.

Liberty Head|Large Cent|1816|1857|As a response to public criticism of the Classic Head, the Mint assigned Chief Engraver Scot to redesign the cent in 1816. This newest design enlarged the obverse portrait, giving Liberty a much more mature look (leading to the Matron Head reference), and surrounded the portrait with stars along the outer edge of the coin. The \"Matron head\" design was modified in 1835 to give Liberty a younger look and matron head cents continued to be made until 1839.^^^^Facing more negative public reaction, the Coronet cents were redesigned in 1835 by new Chief Engraver Christian Gobrecht. This last major change to the coin updated the obverse by giving Liberty a slimmer, more youthful appearance. Minor tweaks continued through 1843, and the 1843 design prevailed through the end of mintage in 1857. Some 11 years after the large cent was discontinued, a mint employee coined several large cents dated 1868, almost certainly for sale as instant rarities to numismatists. Fewer than a dozen of these unofficial issues, struck in both bronze and copper-nickel, are known to survive.


Liberty Cap|Half Cent|1793|1797|The half cent is the lowest denomination that the United States government has ever struck for circulation. It was introduced with the Liberty Cap Half Cent type in 1793. The coins were struck in two different subtypes with Liberty facing left or right. The final coins of the series were dated 1797, although coins bearing this date would be struck as 1800 when the next design was introduced. This was a common practice at the Mint during this era.^^^^The obverse design of the coins features an image of Liberty with hair unbound and flowing. For the earliest coins she faces left and on later coins she faces right. Behind Liberty a cap on top of a staff is pictured. The reverse design features a wreath of laurel leaves with a bow at the base. The denomination \"Half Cent\" appears within the wreath and the fraction \"1/200\" appears below.^^^^All Liberty Cap Half Cents are scarce, with the majority of the known examples in lower grades. High grade examples are occasionally available, but are often priced relatively high due to the demand from type set collectors and specialists.

Draped Bust|Half Cent|1800|1808|A new design was introduced for the smallest denomination of the United States with the Draped Bust Half Cent. The coins were minted from 1800 to 1808, but were not produced during 1801. The series represents the first type of early copper coins that, for some dates, is somewhat easily acquired in higher grades.^^^^Most specifically, these would be About Uncirculated examples of some of the most common dates. Mint State examples with original surfaces, like all early coppers, are scarce, and some dates warrant a heavy premium due to their rarity. Other varieties, identified in the red book, are very rare as well and seldom appear on the market. A simple date set, regardless of varieties, in lower circulated grades is not too difficult to complete, but finding original examples without corrosion will be difficult in those grades.^^^^The Draped Bust Half Cent was designed by Robert Scot. The same basic obverse design had already been in use for the other non-gold denominations circulating at the time. Liberty is depicted with her hair tied in a ribbon and folds of drapery across her bust. The reverse design was altered from the appearance on the first half cent series by changing the arrangement of leaves in the laurel wreath.

Classic Head|Half Cent|1809|1836|The Classic Head Half Cent was issued for a longer duration of years than the previous designs for the denomination, although several gaps in production reduce the scope of the series. The obverse design of the coin features a rendition of Liberty with rolling curls of hair and a hair band with the inscription \"Liberty\". The reverse design features an alteration of the precious laurel wreath design, with the wreath fully closed and the denomination at center.^^^^The new half cent design was introduced in 1809, after being released on the large cent the year earlier. Although the design would be struck until the mid 1830s, the total series only includes only thirteen different dates. From 1812 to 1824 and again in 1827 and 1830 no half cents were struck for circulation. It is believed that 1831 saw a very limited number of coins struck for circulation, but the debate continues as to whether all pieces produced were proofs. The series ended in 1835, with the 1836 Classic Head Half Cent being a proof-only date and a heralded rarity.^^^^The Classic Head Half Cent series contains a relatively small number of dates, with a limited number of dies used for each date, but many of these are very interesting and a worth a closer look. This site will provide coin collectors with a basic history of the Classic Head Half Cent series, information about the coin design, and details about some of the notable issues and rarities of series.

Braided Hair|Half Cent|1840|1857|The Braided Hair half cent was the first U!!S!! half cent to be struck since the end of the Classic Head half cent in 1836. The design of the Braided Hair half cent was identical to that of its big sibling, the Braided Hair large cent of 1840-57. It was designed by Christian Gobrecht.^^^^The Braided Hair half cent is actually a great deal scarcer than the earlier Classic Head half cent AND Draped Hair half cent. In fact, it actually rivals the Liberty Cap half cent in terms of mintage scarcity. From 1849 through 1857, only two dates, 1851 and 1853, have mintages above 56,000! Even so, the \"common\" 1851 and 1853 dates have mintages of only 147,672 and 129,694 respectively!

World's Columbian Exposition Half Dollar|Classic Commemoratives|1892|1893|As the first commemorative Half Dollar struck, the Columbian half holds a special place in the long and historic commemorative series. From the first proof striking that sold for $10,000 in 1892,(The first specimen struck was bought for $10,000 by the firm that made Remington typewriters, as a publicity stunt) and to the final 1893 business strike, Columbian Halves were popularly collected at the time and in the hundred years since.^^^^In August 1892 Congress specially authorized the coinage of 5 million half dollars for sale during the 1892 World’s Columbian Exposition to honor the 400th anniversary of Columbus “discovery” of the New World. This was the first of the great World’s Fairs to be honored with a commemorative coins. The first issue was dated 1892. The Exposition was scheduled to open in Chicago in October 1892, but did not open until May 1893, at which time additional coins bearing this new date were struck.^^^^The obverse features the bust right of Christopher Columbus. The coin was originally supposed to be made by U!!S!!J!! Dunbar. His design was based on a portrait painted by Lorenzo Lotto of Columbus in 1512. The U!!S!! Mint’s Chief Engraver at the time, Charles E!! Barber, derailed any attempt by Dunbar from producing the coin, and instead took on the project, basing his depiction of Columbus allegedly on a bust made by artist Olin L!! Warner.^^^^Barber clashed with Exposition officials over the reverse as well, favoring his own design of the Western Hemisphere covering the entire reverse. Exposition officials wanted a depiction of Columbus’ flag ship the Santa Maria poised over two globes. Seeking to absolve himself of the argument, Barber delegated the task to his Assistant Engraver, George T!! Morgan to design the reverse.^^^^By the time a further quantity had been coined in 1893, public demand for the commemorative had lessened. An unknown quantity of half-dollars were used as collateral against loans made to the Exposition by banks. When the Exposition failed to repay the debits, the banks dumped the coins into circulation.

World's Columbian Exposition - Isabella Quarter Dollar|Classic Commemoratives|1893|1893|The Isabella quarter or Columbian Exposition quarter was a United States commemorative coin struck in 1893. Congress authorized the piece at the request of the Board of Lady Managers of the World's Columbian Exposition. The quarter depicts Queen Isabella of Spain, who sponsored Columbus' voyages to the New World. It was designed by Bureau of the Mint Chief Engraver Charles E!! Barber, and is the only U!!S!! commemorative of that denomination that was not intended for circulation.^^^^The Board of Lady Managers, headed by Chicago socialite Bertha Palmer, wanted to have a woman design the coin and engaged Caroline Peddle, a sculptor. Peddle left the project after disagreements with Mint officials, who then decided to have Barber do the work. The reverse design, showing a kneeling woman winding flax, with a distaff in her left hand and a spindle in her right, symbolizes women's industry and was based on a sketch by Assistant Engraver George T!! Morgan.^^^^The quarter's design was deprecated in the numismatic press. The coins did not sell well at the Exposition; its price of $1 was the same as for the Columbian half dollar and the quarter was seen as the worse deal. Nearly half of the authorized issue was returned to the Mint to be melted; thousands more were purchased at face value by the Lady Managers and entered the coin market in the early 20th century. Today, they are popular with collectors and valued in the hundreds to thousands of dollars.

Lafayette Dollar|Classic Commemoratives|1900|1900|The 1900-dated Lafayette silver dollar represents the first United States commemorative coin of that denomination and the only silver dollar commemorative to be minted until decades later in the 1980s. Interestingly, from an official viewpoint the “1900” designation appearing on the Lafayette dollar is not the official date of the coin. Indeed, apparently, the coin has no official date.^^^^In 1899 the Lafayette Memorial Commission sought to raise funds to erect in Paris in 1900 (in connection with the Universal Exposition to be held there) a statue of General Lafayette on horseback, to be sculpted by Paul Wayland Bartlett. This was to be a gift of the American people to honor the Frenchman who in 1777, when he was not quite 20 years old, risked his life and fortune when he paid for French troops to come with him to America to aid the colonists. Although he was wounded in the Battle of Brandywine, Lafayette, who received the designation major general, served until the end of the war. In 1824 the French hero of the American Revolution visited the United States once again, was given a grand welcome, toured all 24 states, and was designated by Congress as “the nation’s guest.” The relationship between America and France has been close ever since that time, as evidenced, among other things, by France’s gift to America of the Statue of Liberty, dedicated in 1886.^^^^In early 1899 the Commission petitioned Congress for an appropriation to coin 100,000 commemorative half dollars. By the time the legislation was approved on March 3, 1899, the authorization was for 50,000 silver one-dollar pieces, to be known as Lafayette dollars, to bear designs selected by the director of the Mint, with the approval of the secretary of the Treasury. The Treasury was authorized to purchase in the open market $25,000 worth of silver bullion or as much as might be needed to coin such pieces. Subsequently the quantity of 38,675.875 ounces of fine silver was purchased for $23,032!!80, making possible the striking of 50,000 coins per the legislation, plus an additional 26 pieces for the assay. It was intended that the coins be sold for $2 each to the public.^^^^The die work for the Lafayette dollar was accomplished by Chief Engraver Charles E!! Barber, who, according to conventional history, took the portrait of Washington from the famous bust by Jean Antoine Houdon (the same portrait that was to be utilized years later by John Flanagan when the 1932 Washington quarter dollar was created). Lafayette’s portrait, which appears behind and slightly forward of Washington’s, was said to have been taken from an 1824 “Defender of American and French Liberty” medal made in France by François Augustin Caunois.^^^^However, as historian Arlie Slabaugh has pointed out, the conjoined portraits of Washington and Lafayette on the obverse of the 1900 commemorative dollar were almost certainly plagiarized by Barber from the obverse of the Yorktown Centennial medal of 1881, made from dies engraved by Peter L!! Krider. Stated more kindly, the Yorktown medal was an intermediary between the commemorative dollar and the earlier work of Houdon and Caunois. The shadow relief of Barber’s work is but a travesty of Krider’s extremely detailed high-relief artistry.


Sommer Islands (Bermuda)|British New World Issues|1616|1616|This coinage, was issued around 1616, was the first struck for England's colonies in the New World. The coins were known as \"Hogge Money\" or \"Hoggies.\"^^^^The pieces were made of copper lightly silvered, in four denominations: shilling, six-pence, threepence, and twopence, indicated by Roman numerals. The hog is the main device and appears on the obverse side of each. SOMMER ISLANDS is inscribed within beaded circles. The reverse shows a full-rigged galleon with the flag of St!! George on each of four masts.